Kathleen Jefferson
SEMANTIC CLAUSE ANALYSIS
IN FOCUS
FOR LEARNING KAYAPÓ
Associação Internacional de Lingüística SIL – Brasil
Anápolis – GO
* This paper is essentially the same as the 1974 version made available
as No. 061 of the Arquivo Linguístico (Summer Institute of Linguistics,
Brasília, DF);only the page size and numbering have been changed, and
a few minor typographical errors corrected.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
How to Use This Paper
Frame Drills
Action Process
Locutionary Process
Mental Processes
Relational Processes
Ambient Processes
Abbreviations Used
Chart of Role Occurrence
Action Process and Accompanying Roles
Locutionary Process and Accompanying Roles
Mental Processes, and Accompanying Roles
Relational Processes, and Accompanying Roles  (4.0-4.7)
Ambient Processes, and Accompanying Roles
The purpose of this paper is to tie early language learning into current trends in linguistic
theory.  Frame drills are presented using the principle of "overlearning" to set the information in
the student's mind. Although new vocabulary is necessarily used, the primary intent of the drills
is to learn the kinds of clause types found in the Kayapó1 language, and the types of surface
structure verbs that go with them. An appendix will be found at the end of the frames, which
provides concise definitions of terms used and how these terms relate to the surface structure of
the language.
The student may wonder why a study of semantic clause analysis is needed or even
desireable. We readily recognize in our own use of English that there is often more information
in a given clause or sentence than is described by only looking at it in terms of nouns, verbs, etc.
who would give, or sell, etc. the potatoes to me.  Semantic clause analysis is, then, an attempt to
bring out the significance of all of the information carried by the surface structure (in terms of
nouns, verbs, etc.) of the language. The unit of study is the clause in which participants interact
with each other according to the process described by the verb.  A process indicates in what state
or action the participants named in the clause are involved. The participants are animate or
inanimate entities, which are involved in the process described by the verb. They are expressed
in surface structure by nouns or noun phrases. The relationships between participants and
processes are described by the roles of each participant.
Five major types of processes have been found in Kayapó,2 and twenty types of roles.
Different processes have diverse role combinations or role frames, which are inherently possible.
See accompanying chart of role occurrence (pg. 18).
HOW TO USE THIS PAPER
It is recommended that the student arrange the material in some kind of a looseleaf
notebook for ease of adding his own frames as he studies. The frames are representative of all of
the processes found in the language, but no attempt has been made to be exhaustive.
For optimum benefit each participant should be changed in each of the frames. This has
been done for the first five roles involving action processes (frames 1-17). Thereafter, the student
is expected to make his own expansions.
Each frame is headed by the process, followed by the role which is in focus. Footnotes at
the bottom of some frames clarify points that are not included in the more general English gloss
on the right of each page. The frames are numbered consecutively. The order of the frames
presents the processes and roles in terms of frequency of occurrence, starting with those most
For ease of reference, the appendix of definitions is set up in outline form with the five
major processes appearing in the same order in which they appear in the frames. Sub-processes
and roles are arranged alphabetically under the process where they are introduced.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent only
Ba muw
Ba idjàpêx
eat (habitually)
1-obligatory first person marker.
2-obligatory morphophonemic changes between two vowels.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent only
He (Kôkôti)
Gu me
We (including the one spoken to)
Ba me
We (excluding the one spoken to)
You (plural, small group)
They (everyone)
1-When the tense marker is either # or nẽ, the gloss can be either present or past.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient
Ba môp
Ba krãtỳx ngre kaba
Ba kà
Ba karõ
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient
môp kaba
We (including the one spoken to and a few others)
Gu me
We (including the one spoken to and many others)
They (small group)
They (large group, everyone)
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient
Ba môp kaba
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Instrument
P I
Ba # kôo
1- The suffix o means 'with'.
2- In Kayapó, there are different surface forms for repetitive and non repetitive process.
The repetitive form of this process is kupa. This form would be used with the
following combinations: (singular agent, plural patient)
(plural agent, singular patient)
(singular agent, singular patient)
(the action is repeated)
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Instrument
P    I
'Kôkôti (he)
'You (plural, small group)
Ga me
'You (plural, large group)
'They (everyone)
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Instrument
P I
Ba # kàxo
Processes-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Benificiary
Ba amã
môp kaba
'I dug carà
Ba amã krãtỳx ngre kaba
the turtle eggs
Ba amã kà
Ba amã karõ
1- Obligatory person marker slot is filled here by a 'you'.
2- mã meaning 'to' or 'for'.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Benificiary
Ba amĩm
môp kaba
me kum
ar imã
for us (excluding the one
ar amã
for you (plural, small group).'
1- contraction of amĩ and u.
2- contraction of ku and mã.
3- Either of these are acceptable.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Benifìciary
môp kaba
Gu me
We (including the one spoken to)
Ba me
We (excluding the one spken to)
You (plural, small group)
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Benificiary
Ba Kôkôtimã
môp kaba
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent  Patient Maleficiary
Birbir abê
1- The maleficiary is made up of an obligatory person marker plus bê  'from'.
2- The possessed form of the second person 'you', is optional in this construction.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Maleficiary
Birbir abê
anhõ mryo akĩ
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Maleficiary
Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Maleficiary
Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ
o abdju
o tẽ
o ajkẽn
Birbir abê anhõ mry
took your meat in his hand from you.'
kubẽkà kadjô
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Maleficiary
Ba abê
Birbir ibê ngõr
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Patient Locative
me'õ ne
kangã bĩ
1- This word when unstressed means 'in' or 'on'.
2- When used with location words, bê carries the meaning of 'in'.
3- non-future tense marker.
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Range
Extent Range
ne # kanê
o amykry
Tãm ne # õt
o akati
was sick
Birbir mũm prõt
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Range
Quality Range
Inã ijã
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Result
Ne Birbir nõ
Your mother
You (plural, small group)
They (everyone)
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Comitative
Birbir nã ro'ã
'Birbir works together with her mother.'
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Comitative
Ba akôt
Process-- Action
Role-- Agent Comitative Locative
Kôkôti ar
ro'ã ngôjmã
'Kôkôti went to the water
Process-- Action
Role-- Source
Ikrãkam tokry
Ipar miôpmiôp
Process-- Action
Role-- Source  Patient
Arỳm ne kôk pi'ôko
Process-- Action
Role-- Patient Range
Quality Range
ne pãnh
is worth cr 20,00.'
war club
1- pãnh means 'trade', carries the idea here of 'to be worth'.
Process-- Locutionary
Role-- Speaker Addressee
Sp Ad
Process-- Locutionary
Role-- Speaker  Addressee  Proposition
Sp Ad Prop.
nẽ ba #
Process-- Mental Cognitive
Role-- Experiencer Proposition
Kôkôti kute
pi'ôk no'ôk
weave a mat.'
djudjê nhipêx
Process-- Mental
Desiderative Role-- Experiencer Proposition
Imã jàt
bày gogo
Process-- Mental
Perceptual Role-- Experiencer Proposition
Kôkôti ne
me ngrer ma
'Kôkôti heard
me karõ
me àkjêr
Process-- Attributive Relational
Role-- Attribuand Attribute
ne ja
Process-- Causative Relational
Role-- Agent Attribute Patient
Ba ne ba êdjào
I filled
Process-- Experiential Relational
Role-- Experiencer  State
Ex.  St.
Ex.  St.
Ikatyk mex
'I'm exhausted.'
Process-- Experiential Relational
Role-- Experiencer State
Imã prãm
Imã kôr
Imã kĩnh
Imã kry
Imã djukanga
1- There is a small class of processes that require the form of (personal pronoun plus
mã 'to') in the Experiencer slot.
Process-- Identificational Relational
Role-- Identified Identifier
mengrer djwỳnh
1- This usage occurs when referring to the masks worn in a festival dance.
Process-- Locational Relational
Role-- Locative
1- In this construction, the noun (i.e. jàt) becomes the process, since there is no verb to
express 'existence' as such.
Process-- Inchoative Relational
Role-- Attribute  Patient
Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro mõ
kamrêk mõ
Process-- Stative Relational
Role-- Attribute  Patient
Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro
Process-- Action Ambient
Role-- Ambient Attribute
Arỳm ne na
kôk jabêr tỳx
Process-- Inchoative Ambient
Role-- Ambient Attribute
Arỳm ne aringro tỳx mõ
Process-- Stative Ambient
Role-- Ambient Attribute
Arỳm ne kàjkwa
aringro tỳx
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS PAPER
KAYAPÓ ROLE OCCURRENCE
(never occurs)
± (may occur)
# (yet to be discovered)
Action Process-- involves a particular activity or motion performed by the participants.
They are realized in surface structure by verbs.
Agent Role-- an animate participant who initiates and performs the action specified by
the verb. The agent role implies volition. It is realized in surface structure as the subject
of the surface verb.
Beneficiary Role-- an animate participant, which benefits from the action specified by the
verb. It is marked in surface structure by a noun or pronoun followed by mã 'for' or 'to'.
Comitative Role-- is the animate participant who co-operates with the agent in
performing the action specified by the verb. It always combines with the agent role. It is
participant is co-agent in performing the action, or by a noun or pronoun followed by
kôt 'with' when the agent leads the co-agent in performing the specified action.
Instrument Role-- the inanimate object used by the agent to do the action specified by the
verb. It is expressed in surface structure by a noun followed by o 'with'.
Locative Role-- is the entity specifying the location of the action specified by the verb. It
is realized in surface structure by a noun followed by a locative particle kam or bê 'in'.
Maleficiary Role-- an animate participant, which is deprived by the action specified by
the verb. It is marked in surface structure by a noun or pronoun followed by bê
Patient Role-- the entity affected or acted upon by the process specified by the verb. It is
realized in surface structure as object of the surface verb.
Range Role-- the inanimate entity, which states or measures the quality or extent of the
action specified by the verb. It is realized in surface structure as object.
Result Role-- a role, which does not exist at the beginning of the action, but is produced
by the action. It is realized in surface structure as object.
Source Role-- an inanimate participant, which is the non-instigative cause of the action
specified. It is realized in surface structure as subject of the surface verb.
Locutionary Process-- involves speech acts in which a participant (the speaker) speaks to
another participant (the addressee). It is realized in surface structure as verbs such as
'call', 'ask' and 'speak'.
Addressee Role-- is the animate participant who is spoken to in the speech act specified
by a locutionary verb. It is realized in surface structure as object.
him to give me coffee.'). It may take the surface form of a statement of the full process
for coffee').
Speaker Role-- is the human participant who performs the speech act specified by a
locutionary verb. The speaker has the surface structure form of subject in the clause.
Mental Process-- involves a mental state of perception or experience on the part of an
animate participant. This category includes three types of processes:
Cognitive Mental Process-- involves the mind and its various functions. It is realized in
surface structure by such verbs as 'think', 'know', 'decide' and 'remember'.
Desiderative Mental Process-- involves the mind in its more specific function in relation
to the emotions. It is realized in surface structure by such verbs as 'want', 'like', 'dislike',
'sad' and 'happy'.
Perceptual Mental Process-- involves the mental state of perception. It is realized in
surface structure by such verbs as 'see', 'hear' and 'touch'.
3.3.1 Experiencer Role-- is the participant who experiences the mental or sensory state
described by the verb. The experiencer is realized in surface structure as subject in the
3.3.2 Proposition Role-- (see 2.2)
Relational Process-- takes the form of a relation between two participating entities or
between one participating entity and an attribute. These processes may be analyzed in
terms of seven kinds of relations.
Attributive Relational Process-- expresses the relationship between the participant and a
quality attributed to him. The relation is one of class inclusion.
4.1.1 Attribuand Role-- is the participant who is bearer of an attribute. It is expressed in surface
structure by an animate or inanimate subject, or 'this'.
4.1.2 Attribute Role-- is the quality, which describes a participant. It is expressed in surface
structure by a noun or adjective.
Causative Relational Process-- is that in which the participant in an agent role causes the
participant in the patient role to acquire an attribute. In the surface form, the preposition
"o" preceding the attribute indicates a causative process involving an agent.
4.2.1 Agent Role-- (see 1.1)
4.2.2 Attribute Role-- (see 4.1.2)
4.2.3 Patient Role-- (see 1.7)
Experiential Relational Process-- expresses
participant and a temporary sensory state.
4.3.1 Experiencer Role-- (see 3.3.1)
4.3.2 State Role-- is the non-inherent mental or sensory feeling experienced by the participant.
Identificational Relational Process-- expresses the relationship between the participant
requiring identification and the reference by which the identification is made. The
relation is one of identity.
4.4.1 Identified Role-- is the participant requiring identification and identified by means of
reference to a set of identifying properties. It is realized in surface structure as subject.
4.4.2 Identifier Role-- is the participant or entity to which reference is made for a definite
identification of the participant requiring identification. It has the surface structure form
of bê.
Inchoative Relational Process-- expresses the process in which a participant is acquiring a
temporary attribute. The surface form of the inchoative clause is derived from the surface
form of the corresponding stative clause by adding the mõ causativizer to the end of the
stative clause.
4.5.1 Attribute Role-- (see 4.1.2)
4.5.2 Patient Role-- (see 1.7)
Locationa1 Relational Process-- expresses the relationship between the participant and its
location. It may have only one participant, which is realized in surface structure by a
noun plus a locative particle.
4.6.1 Locative Role-- (see 1.5)
Stative Relational Process-- expresses a temporary relationship between a participant and
an attribute.
4.7.1 Attribute Role-- (see 4.1.2)
4.7.2 Patient Role-- (see 1.7)
Ambient Role-- describes general meteorological conditions such as weather, night and
day. They may be analyzed in terms of three kinds of processes, each of which may co-
occur with the Range Role.
Ambient Action Process-- involves a particular meteorological activity performed by an
ambient phenomenon in participant function. It is realized in surface structure as an
ambient noun subject and one of two active verbs (ruw 'come down', and jabêr 'rock').
Ambient Inchoative Process-- describes a change of state of the weather to the ambient
process in the clause. The surface form of the inchoative clause is derived from the
surface form of the corresponding state or action clause by adding mõ to the end of the
Ambient Stative Process-- expresses a temporary relationship between a meteorological
phenomenon and an attribute.
5.3.1 Ambient Role-- is a meteorological phenomenon. It is realized in surface structure by an
ambient noun as subject.
5.3.2 Attribute Role-- is the quality, which describes a participant or meteorological
phenomenon. It is realized in surface structure by a small group of adjectives.
The Kayapó speak a Jê language classified by Davis (1968) along with Apinayé as a
member of the Northwest Jê subfamily. At the time this paper was written there were
approximately 1500 people living in seven villages in southern Pará and northern Mato Grosso,
Brazil. In Mekrãgnõti and the villages in Mato Grosso, the people are monolingual, with the
exception of one or two men in each village who speak some Portuguese.  In the other Kayapó
villages, there is some degree of bilingualism, especially in Gorotire where even some of the
women speak Portuguese, but Kayapó is still their mother tongue, spoken in the villages. In the
Mekrãgnõti village there is still very little contact with the outside.  The other villages have quite
a lot of contact with Brazilian culture due to the highway, ranchers, and biweekly Brazilian Air
Force flights.
Extended contact with the tribe was made possible through contracts held between the
Summer Institute of Linguistics and the Ministry of the Interior, National Indian Foundation
(FUNAI) and the National Museum, Rio de Janeiro.
The author wishes to thank Ivan Lowe who directed the workshop held under the
auspices of the Summer Institute of Linguistics in Belém, Pará, Brazil in 1974.  The author also
wishes to extend special thanks to Margaret Lowe, Mickey Stout, and Loraine Bridgeman who
gave hours of their time and many helpful suggestions concerning the organization and
presentation of the material.
The author is also indebted to Linda Koopman, Sally Koehn, and Cathy Hodsdon of the
Summer Institute of Linguistics for access to their research on this topic, and to Earl Trapp of the
Unevangelized Fields Mission for access to his language materials.
Special thanks also goes to the language helper Bepkũm without whose help this paper
could not have been written.
The orthography used in this article is based on a phonemic analysis.  It is used as a
practical orthography by the Kayapó, having been developed in accordance with the National
Indian Foundation to correspond with the Luzo-Brazilian orthography.  Symbols used are:
i e ê a à o ô u y ỳ
Nasal Vowels,
ĩ ẽ ã õ ũ ỹ
For a complete description of the phonemes see Stout and Thomson, 1974a.
Koopman, Linda, 1974.  "Semantic Clause Analysis of Apinajé", Prepublication manuscript.
Stout, Mickey and Ruth Thomson, 1974.  "Fonêmica Txukuhamẽi (Kayapo)", Série Lingüística,
No. 3, Pp. 153-76.
Thomson, Ruth and Mickey Stout,  1974.  "Elementos Proposicionais em Orações Kayapó",
Série Lingüística, No. 3, Pp. 35-67.