muw I cry	ba
muw I cried	ba
I sleep	ba ngõr
I slept	ba ngõr
I walk	ba mrã
I walked	ba mrã
muw you cry	ga
muw you cried	ga
you sleep	ga ngõr
you slept	ga ngõr
you walk	ga mrã
you walked	ga mrã
muw he cries	#
muw he cried	#
he sleeps	# ngõr
he slept	# ngõr
he walks	# mrã
he walked	# mrã
me muw we cry	gu
me muw we cried	gu
we sleep	gu me ngõr
we slept	gu me ngõr
we walk	gu me mrã
we walked	gu me mrã
me muw we cry	ba
me muw we cried	ba
we sleep	ba me ngõr
we slept	ba me ngõr
we walk	ba me mrã
we walked	ba me mrã
muw we cry	gar
muw we cried	gar
we sleep	gar ngõr
we slept	gar ngõr
we walk	gar mrã
we walked	gar mrã
muw they cry	me
muw they cried	me
they sleep	me ngõr
they slept	me ngõr
they walk	me mrã
they walked	me mrã
kaba I dig yams	ba jàt
kaba I dig manioc	ba kwỳr
tyrti kaba I dig bananas	ba
ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs	ba krãtỳx
kaba I skinned the animal	ba kà
kaba I took the photograph	ba karõ
ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs	ba krãtỳx
ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs	ba krãtỳx
in an earth oven	ba môp ga I baked cará
in a basket	ba môp tu I carried cará
I killed it with a stick	Ba # kôo kubĩ
I killed it with a rifle	Ba # katõko kubĩ
I killed it with an arrow	Ba # kruwo kubĩ
I killed it with a club	Ba # kopo kubĩ
I killed it with a rock	Ba # kẽno kubĩ
I killed it with a machete	Ba # kàxo kubĩ
you killed it with a machete	ga # kàxo kubĩ
killed it with a machete	Kôkôti # kàxo kubĩ Kôkôti
He killed it with a machete	# # kàxo kubĩ
you killed it with a machete	gar # kàxo kubĩ
you killed it with a machete	ga me # kàxo kubĩ
they killed it with a machete	me # kàxo kubĩ
kaba I dug it with a machete	ba # kàxo
I cleared it with a machete	ba # kàxo karê
I cut it with a machete	ba # kàxo kukà
for you	ba amã môp kaba I dug carà
to you	ba amã môp kaba I dug carà
kaba I dug yams for you	ba amã jàt
kaba I dug yams to you	ba amã jàt
kaba I dug manioc for you	ba amã kwỳr
kaba I dug manioc to you	ba amã kwỳr
tyrti kaba I dug bananas for you	ba amã
tyrti kaba I dug bananas to you	ba amã
ngre kaba I dug the turtle eggs for you	ba amã krãtỳx
ngre kaba I dug the turtle eggs to you	ba amã krãtỳx
kaba I dug the animal for you	ba amã kà
kaba I dug the animal to you	ba amã kà
kaba I dug the photograph for you	ba amã karõ
kaba I dug the photograph to you	ba amã karõ
tyrti kaba I dug bananas for you	ba amã
tyrti kaba I dug bananas to you	ba amã
for myself	Ba amĩm môp kaba I dug cará
for him	ba kum môp kaba I dug cará
for her	Ba kum môp kaba I dug cará
for them	Ba me kum môp kaba I dug cará
for them	Ba mekmã môp kaba I dug cará
for us	Ba ar imã môp kaba I dug cará
for you	Ba ar amã môp kaba I dug cará
for him	Ba kum môp kaba I dig cará
for her	Ba kum môp kaba I dig cará
for us	Ba ar imã môp kaba I dig cará
for him	ga kum môp kaba You dig cará
for her	ga kum môp kaba You dig cará
for us	ga ar imã môp kaba You dig cará
for him	me kum môp kaba They dig cará
for her	me kum môp kaba They dig cará
for us	me ar imã môp kaba They dig cará
Birbir stole your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ
Birbir stole your corn from you	Birbir abê anhõ bayo akĩ
Birbir stole your tobacco from you	Birbir abê anhõ karinhôo akĩ
Birbir stole your clothing from you	Birbir abê anhõ kubẽkào akĩ
Birbir stole your rifle from you	Birbir abê anhõ katõko akĩ
Birbir stole your necklace from you	Birbir abê anhõ angào akĩ
Birbir stole my meat from me	Birbir ibê anhõ mryo akĩ
Birbir stole my meat from me	Birbir kutê anhõ mryo akĩ
Birbir stole his meat from him	Birbir Kôkôtibê anhõ mryo akĩ
meat from him	Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ Birbir stole Kôkôti's
Birbir stole your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ
the chief's meat from him.	Birbir bẽnjadjwỳrbê anhõ mryo akĩ
I stole your meat from you	ba abê anhõ mryo akĩ
someone stole your meat from you	me'õ abê anhõ mryo akĩ
they stole your meat from you	me abê anhõ mryo akĩ
mryo abdju Birbir hid your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ
Birbir took your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ mryo tẽ
Birbir ruined your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ mryo ajkẽn
Birbir ate your meat from you	Birbir abê anhõ mry krẽ
mry by Birbir took your meat in his hand from you	Birbir abê anhõ
Birbir broke your rifle from you	Birbir abê anhõ katõk kwỳr
Birbir ripped your cloth/clothes from you	Birbir abê anhõ kubẽkà kadjô
I fell asleep against you	Ba abê ngõr
I fell asleep from you	Ba abê ngõr
I fell asleep against Birbir	Ba Birbirbê ngõr
I fell asleep against him	Ba kubê ngõr
I fell asleep against your father	Ba abãmbê ngõr
I fell asleep against your mother	Ba anãbê ngõr
I fell asleep against them	Ba mebê ngõr
Birbir fell asleep against me	Birbir ibê ngõr
he fell asleep against me	# ibê ngõr
You fell asleep against me	ga ibê ngõr
they fell asleep against me	me ibê ngõr
Someone killed the snake in the forest	Bàkam me'õ ne kangã bĩ
Someone killed the snake in the house	Kikrekam me'õ ne kangã bĩ
Someone killed the snake in the village	Krĩbê me'õ ne kangã bĩ
Someone killed the snake in the men's house	Ngàbê me'õ ne kangã bĩ
Someone killed the snake in the trail	Prykam me'õ ne kangã bĩ
o amykry He was sick all day	Tãm ne # kanê
o amykry He worked all day	Tãm ne # àpênh
o amykry He played all day	Tãm ne # bixjaêr
o akati He slept all night	Tãm ne # õt
tor o akati He danced all night	Tãm ne #
o akati He was sick all night	Tãm ne # kanê
Birbir ran far	Birbir mũm prõt
Birbir ran far	Birbir wãj prõt
keket Mother laughed at me	Inã ijã
keket Mother laughed at you	Inã ajã
keket Mother laughed at him	Inã 'ã
keket Mother laughed at them	Inã me'ã
keket Mother laughed at us	Inã bajã
Birbir cooked the food	Ne Birbir nõ mrõ
she cooked the food	Ne # nõ mrõ
he cooked the food	Ne # nõ mrõ
your mother cooked the food	Ne anã nõ mrõ
I cooked the food	Ne ba nõ mrõ
you cooked the food	Ne gar nõ mrõ
they cooked the food	Ne ne nõ mrõ
Birbir works together with her mother	Birbir nã ro'ã ne àpênh
Birbir works together with her sister	Birbir kanikwỳj ne àpênh
Birbir works together with her child	Birbir kra ne àpênh
Birbir works together with them	Birbir me ne àpênh
I go with you	Ba akôt tẽ
I go the chief	Ba bẽnjadjwỳrkôt tẽ
I go with my mother	Ba inãkôt tẽ
I go with them	Ba mekôt tẽ
went to the water with him	Kôkôti ar ro'ã ngôjmã tẽ Kôkôti
went to the forest with him	Kôkôti ar ro'ã bàkam tẽ Kôkôti
went to the house with him	Kôkôti ar ro'ã kikremã tẽ Kôkôti
went to the field with him	Kôkôti ar ro'ã purmã tẽ Kôkôti
went to the airplane with him	Kôkôti ar ro'ã màtkà'ỳr tẽ Kôkôti
tokry My head hurts	Ikrãkam
tokry My stomach hurts	Itikkam
tokry My back hurts	Ikôkam
My foot itches	Ipar miôpmiôp
My arm itches	Ipa miôpmiôp
The wind scattered the papers	Arỳm ne kôk pi'ôko ajngrà
The wind scattered the cotton	Arỳm ne kôk kadjàto ajngrà
The wind scattered the clothes	Arỳm ne kôk kubẽkào ajngrà
The wind scattered the leaves	Arỳm ne kôk pi'ôo ajngrà
He lied to me	Nãm # imã êx
He lied to his mother	Nãm # nãmã êx
He lied to his father	Nãm # bãmmã êx
He lied to the chief	Nãm # bẽnjadjwỳrmã êx
ku'uw I asked him for meat	Arỳm nẽ ba # mry 'ã
ku'uw I asked him for corn	Arỳm nẽ ba # bày 'ã
ku'uw I asked him for water	Arỳm nẽ ba # ngô 'ã
ku'uw I asked him for bananas	Arỳm nẽ ba # tyrti 'ã
ku'uw I asked him for fish	Arỳm nẽ ba # tep 'ã
knows how to read	Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh Kôkôti
knows how to write	Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh Kôkôti
knows how to write	Kôkôti kute kupip ka'ur pumũnh Kôkôti
knows how to make a bow	Kôkôti kute djudjê nhipêx pumũnh Kôkôti
knows how to the path	Kôkôti kute pry pumũnh Kôkôti
I want yams	Imã jàt prãm
I want a mosquito ne	Imã motkiteru prãm
I want meat	Imã mry prãm
I want bananas	Imã tyrti prãm
I want yams	Imã jàt prãm
I want corn	Imã bày prãm
I want rice	Imã bày gogo prãm
heard the singing	Kôkôti ne me ngrer ma Kôkôti
heard the talk	Kôkôti ne # kabẽn ma Kôkôti
heard the spirits	Kôkôti ne me karõ ma Kôkôti
heard the howler monkey	Kôkôti ne # kubyt ma Kôkôti
heard the yelling	Kôkôti ne me àkjêr ma Kôkôti
ne ja This is a stone	Kẽn
ne ja This is a field	Pur
ne ja This is a path	Pry
ne ja This is an armadillo	Tônti
ne ja This is medicine	Pidjỳ
ne ja This is a fish	Tep
I made the string red	Ba ne ba êdjào kamrêk
ipu I filled it	Ba ne ba #
I emptied it	Ba ne ba # kaprỳ
mex I'm exhausted	Ikatyk
I'm hungry	Imã prãm
kry I'm cold	Imã
I'm thirsty	Imã kôr
I'm happy	Imã kĩnh
djukanga I'm lazy	Imã
Birbir I am Birbir	Ibê
He is the chief	Kubê bẽnjadjwỳr
He is the festival leader	Kubê mengrer djwỳnh
He is the monkey	Kubê kukôj
There are yams in the field	Purkam jàt
ngiadjy There are deer in the forest	Bàkam
tep There are fish in the water	Ngôkam
There is fruit in the tree	Pĩkam pidjô
The food is getting hot	Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro mõ
The corn corn is drying	Arỳm ne bày ngrà mõ
kangro The food is hot	Arỳm ne djwỳ
The corn is dry	Arỳm ne bày ngrà
It is red	Arỳm ne # kamrêk
ipu It is full	Arỳm ne #
It is empty	Arỳm ne # kaprỳ
It is raining hard	Arỳm ne na rwyk tỳx
It is very windy	Arỳm ne kôk jabêr tỳx
rax It is clear	Arỳm ne kàjkwa
punu-re It is cloudy	Arỳm ne kàjkwa
It is sunny	Arỳm ne aringro tỳx
It is day	Arỳm ne akati #
It is night	Arỳm ne akamàt #
ga? Johnny, is that you?	Johnny djãm
a man)	Nà, ba Yes, it's me (for
Where are you going?	Mỳjrỳ ga tẽ?
I'm going to the river	Ngô'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
a man)	Aj. 'Ỳr tẽ Then go (for
a woman)	Ã, ba Yes, it's me (for
a woman)	Anũ. 'Ỳr tẽ Then go (for
man talking)	aj yes! (informal,
woman talking)	anũ yes! (informal,
I'm going to the river	Ngô 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
I'm going to the forest	Bà 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
I'm going to the town	Krĩrax 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
I'm going to the city	Krĩrax 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
I'm going to the men's house	Ngà 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
I'm going to the house	Kikre 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ
Where are you going?	Jãm ne ga tẽ?
I'm going to the country	Purmã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to the country	Pur mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to the village	Krĩ mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to Belem	Berẽ mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to the men's house	Ngà mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to the town	Krĩrax mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to the city	Krĩrax mã ne ba tẽ
I'm going to my house	Inhũrkwã mã ne ba tẽ
Are you going to the river?	Djãm ngô'ỳr ne ga tẽ?
No, I'm going to my house	Kati. Inhũrkwã'ỳr ne ba tẽ.
I'm going with you, ok?	Ba akôt tẽ
Sure, let's go!	Gu 'ỳr
I'm going now.	Arỳm ne ba itẽmmã
Then go	Anũ mã
in this moment	arỳm
They are going with you	ar akôt tẽ
is going with you	Kôkôti akôt tẽ Kôkôti
They are going with you	Me akôt tẽ
I'm going with everyone	Ba me kôt tẽ
I'm going with them	Ba ar kôt tẽ
I'm going with him	Ba kôt tẽ
I'm going with you	Ba ar akôt tẽ
I'm going with my mother	Ba inã kôt tẽ
Kayapo is a beautiful language	Me bêngôkre kabẽn ne mexkumrẽx
I want to learn to speak your language	Ije akabẽn mar prãmã
Whenever I make a mistake, correct me, alright?	Gop imã me akabẽn katàt jarẽ, nẽn?
So far, I only understand a little bit!	Ije mar ngrire rã'ã
the correct way to talk	katàt
let's study again tomorrow, ok?	Ajte akatibê, nẽn?
repeat that	Ajte ja jarẽ
repeat the whole phrase	Ajte kunĩ jarẽ
ba kuma now I understand	Arỳmne
let's start to work	Gu badjàpênh o nhỹ
I still don't understand	Ije mar kêt rã'ã
tell this to me	Imã ja jarẽ
tell me the whole thing	Imã ja kunĩ jarẽ
Johnny, I arrived	Johnny, arỳm ne ba awỳr bôx.
ga? Is it you?	Djãm
It's really me!	Ãã, bakêt
do you like bananas?	Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?
Yes, I do.	Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh.
by Get some	Mĩ, 'õ
These bananas are delicious! I love them!	Tyrtija ne ànhkumrẽx. Imã ành.
I'm already leaving	Arỳmne ba itẽmmã.
Do you like banana?	Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?
Do you like cara?	Djãm amã môp kĩnh?
Do you like sweet potato?	Djãm amã jàt kĩnh?
Do you like meat?	Djãm amã mry kĩnh?
Do you like beiju?	Djãm amã djwỳ kĩnh?
Do you like corn?	Djãm amã bày kĩnh?
Yes, I like banana	Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh
Yes, I like cara	Ãã, imã môp kĩnh
Yes, I like sweet potato.	Ãã, imã jàt kĩnh
Yes, I like meat.	Ãã, imã mry kĩnh
Yes, I like beiju.	Ãã, imã djwỳ kĩnh
Yes, I like corn.	Ãã, imã bày kĩnh
Are you hungry?	Djãm amã prãm?
Yes, I am	Ãã, imã prãm
Do you like banana?	Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?
Do you accept banana?	Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?
Yes, I like	Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh
Yes, I accept	Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh
by Get some	Mĩ, 'õ
I want bananas	Imã tyrti prãm
I want corn	Imã bày prãm
I want sweet potato	Imã jàt prãm
I like banana	Imã tyrti kĩnh
I like corn	Imã bày kĩnh
I like sweet potato	Imã jàt kĩnh
I really like banana	Imã tyrti djành
I really like corn	Imã bày djành
I really like sweet potato	Imã jàt djành
to feel cold	kry
to be thirsty	kôr
Are you felling alright?	Djãm amexkumrẽx?
No, I'm sick.	Kati. Ikanê.
What are you felling?	Mỳj ne ajã?
tokry I have a terrible headache	Ikrãkam
Did you take some medicine?	Djãm arỳm ne ga anhõ pidjỳ krẽ?
imex jabey Yes, I already took it. Maybe, I'll get better.	Nà, ajbir ne ba inhõ pidjỳ krẽ. Birãm tebê
to feel pain	tokry
I'm not well	Ipunu
You're not well	Apunu
Are you ok?	Djãm amexkumrẽx?
angryk? Are you angry?	Djãm
Are you sad?	Djãm akaprĩre?
arerekre? Are you sad?	Djãm
akatyk? Are you weak?	Djãm
Are you sick?	Djãm akanê?
Are you ok?	Djãm amexkumrẽx?
No, I'm happy	Kati. Ikĩnh
What are you doing?	Mỳj ne ga o nhỹ?
I'm pounding nuts	Pi'y ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ.
I'm crushing nuts	Pi'y ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ.
What are your son eating?	Mỳj ne akra krẽn o nhỹ?
He is eating sweet potato	Jàt ne ikra krẽn o nhỹ
Do you want sweet potato?	Djãm amã jàt kĩnh?
No, I just eat	Kati. Ajbir ne ba inhõ kwỳ krẽ.
ne ba ijajne I'm satisfied	Arỳm
I'm pounding cassava	Kwỳr ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm crushing cassava	Kwỳr ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm pounding corn	Bày ne ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm crushing corn	Bày ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm pounding bananas	Tyrti djô ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm crushing bananas	Tyrti djô ba ka'uk o nhỹ
I'm eating nuts	Pi'y ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm eating corn	Bày ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm eating bananas	Tyrti ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm eating beiju	Djwỳ ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm eating meat	Mry ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm eating fish	Tep ne ba krẽn o nhỹ
I'm working	Ba idjàpênh o nhỹ
I'm singing	Ba ingrer o nhỹ
I'm crying	Ba imỳr o nhỹ
I'm laughing	Ba ikeket o nhỹ
Are you eating?	Djã nã gãm anhõ kwỳ krẽn o nhỹ?
Are you fanning the fire?	Djã nã gãm karibêr o nhỹ?
Are you seeing?	Djã nã gãm omũnh o nhỹ?
No, I'm working	Kati. Nã bãm idjápênh o nhỹ
No, I'm writing	Kati. Nã bãm pi'ôk no'ôk o nhỹ
No, I'm eating	Kati. Nã bãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn o nhỹ
I'm taking care of my son	Ba ikra pumũnh o nhỹ
Johnny, what's that?	Johnny, mỳjneja?
It's a banana	Tyrtineja
tyrtineja? what kind of banana is this?	Mỳj
It's sweet potato	Jàtneja
What kind of sweet potato is this?	Mỳj jàtneja?
mryneja? Is this meat?	Djãm
mryneja Yes, it's meat	Nà,
Is it venison?	Djãm ngijãdjyneja?
No, it's peccary meat.	Kati. Angrôneja.
kind of sweet potato	'ôkti
kind of banana	tekàkamrêkti
neja It's corn	Bày
neja It's Brazil nut	Pi'y
neja It's a farm	Pur
neja It's a house	Kikre
neja It's a men's house	Ngà
neja It's a lake	Imô
newa It's a mortar and pestle	Kawa
newa It's a cloth	Kubẽkà
newa It's a fire	Kuwy
newa It's a clay oven	Ki
newa It's a bow	Djudjê
newa It's an arrow	Kruw
newa It's a shotgun	Katõk
newa It's a paper	Pi'ôk
newa It's a book	Pi'ôk
newa It's a metal container	Ngônh
Maria, where's your father?	Maria, nhãr abãm?
He is on the men's house	Ngàbê ne nhỹ.
And where's your mother?	Anãdjwỳ. Nhãr anã?
My mother went to the farm with the others.	Inã ne me kôt purmã mõ
They'll come back soon.	Arỳm me bôx 'ỳr.
akamy? Where's your brother	Nhãr
ba My brother is playing with the others kids	Ikamy me prĩrekôt bixaêro
Where's your sister?	Nhãr akanikwỳnh?
My sister is sitting on the mat.	Ikanikwỳnh ne kupipkam nhỹ
akra? Where's your son?	Nhãr
akra? Where's your daughter?	Nhãr
ne dja He's at home	Kikrekam
He's sitting on the mat	Kupipkam ne nhỹ
He went to the river	Ngô'ỳr ne tẽ
He went to the farm	Purmã ne tẽ
He's sitting on the ground	Pykabê ne nhỹ
He's at home or in the village.	Krĩbê ne nhỹ
Where's beiju?	Nhãr djwỳ?
Where's beiju?	Nãr djwỳ?
Where's sweet potatoes?	Nhãr jàt?
tyrti? Where's bananas?	Nhãr
pi'y? Where's the nuts?	Nhãr
Where's sweet potatoes?	Nãr jàt?
tyrti? Where's bananas?	Nãr
pi'y? Where's the nuts?	Nãr
It's on pot	Ngônhkam ne djwỳ
They're on the table	Pĩponh'ã ne nõ
They're inside the house	Kikrekam ne nõ
They are there	Wãnhne nõ
ne ga o dja? Maria, what are you doing?	Maria, mỳj
weaving a sleeping mat	Kupip ne ba 'yr o dja I’m
o dja? And your brother, is he also weaving a sleeping mat?	Nhym akamydjwỳ. Djãm kupip ne 'yr
No, he's putting feathers on some arrows	Kati. Kruw ne imrô o nhỹ
ne ba kuma. Now, I understand!	Arỳm
o ba? What are the kids doing?	Mỳj ne me prĩre
o ba They're playing.	Me bixaêr
dja to do	o
dja to make	o
o dja I'm weaving	Nã bãm 'yr
o dja You're weaving	Nã gãm 'yr
o dja They're weaving	Nãm ar 'yr
o dja everyone's weaving	Nãm me 'yr
o dja. I'm washing	Nã bãm põnh
o dja. You're washing	Nã gãm põnh
o dja. They're washing	Nâm ar põnh
o dja. Everyone's washing	Nâm ar põnh
o dja I'm eating	Nã bãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn
o dja You're eating	Nã gãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn
o dja They're eating	Nâm ar inhõ kwỳ krẽn
o dja Everyone's eating	Nãm me inhõ kwỳ krẽn
o dja. I'm sweeping the house	Kikrene ba kapõnh
itor o iba. I'm dancing	Ba
tor o aba. You're dancing	Ga
tor o ba. They're dancing	Ar
tor o ba. Everyone's dancing	Me
itor ar o iba. I'm dancing	Ba
ar o iba. I'm playing	Ba ibixaêr
ar o iba. I'm playing soccer	Ba bora japĩn
ar o iba. I'm digging with a hoe	Ba karêr
playing soccer	Ar bora japĩn ar o ba. They're (few)
digging with a hoe	Ar karêr ar o iba. They're (few)
I arrived	Arỳm ne ba awỳr bôx
Who is you?	Nhym nã?
ga? Is it you?	Djãm
ba Yes, it's me	Ãã,
I just arrived from the farm	Ajbir ne ba purkurũm bôx
Do you like corn?	Djãm amã bày kĩnh?
I like it too much	Ãã, imã kĩnhĩ
by Get some for you	Mĩ. Amim 'õ
It's very good.	Mrãmri. Mexkumrẽx.
My brother arrived.	Ikamy ne bôx.
The boss arrived.	Bẽnjadjwỳr ne bôx.
The foreigner arrived.	Kubẽ ne bôx.
My brother arrived.	Ikamy ne bôx.
My father arrived.	Ibãm ne bôx.
Who arrived?	Nhym ne bôx?
Who arrived?	Mỳj me'õ ne bôx?
Who fell?	Mỳj me'õ ne tỹm?
ne tyk? Who died?	Mỳj me'õ
ne muw? Who's crying?	Mỳj me'õ
ne? Who's talking?	Mỳj me'õ ne kabẽn
Who's sitting?	Mỳj me'õ ne nhỹ?
ne ga djuw? Have you already taken bath?	Djãm arỳm
ajbir ne ba djuw. Yes, I finished it just now	Ãã
I almost went with you, but it didn't work out.	Ba te akôt itẽmmã
ne ga djuw? And you? Have you been there?	Gadjwỳ. Djãm arỳm
Not yet.	Idjwỳr ket rã'ã.
on djuw. Let's go now.	Gu
Sure! Let's go. I really want to go! It's so hot!	Ãã, gu on. Idjwỳr prãm. Aringro tỳ:xi.
to take a bath	djwỳr
to take a bath	djuw
to start an action	on
I didn't go	Itẽm kêt
I didn't dance	Itor kêt
I didn't lie down	Inõr kêt
I didn't take bath	Idjwỳr kêt
I didn't go down	Irwỳk kêt
I didn't cry	Imỳr kêt
I didn't sleep	Inhõt kêt
I went	Ba tẽ
to I danced	Ba
I lay down	Ba nõ
djuw I took bath	Ba
ruw I went down	Ba
muw I cried	Ba
I slept	Ba ngõr
Did you go?	Djãm arỳm ne ga tẽ?
ne ga to? Did you dance?	Djãm arỳm
Did you lie down?	Djãm arỳm ne ga nõ?
ne ga djuw? Did you take bath?	Djãm arỳm
ne ga ruw? Did you go down?	Djãm arỳm
ne ga muw? Did you cry?	Djãm arỳm
Did you sleep?	Djãm arỳm ne ga ngõr?
I didn't go yet	Itẽm kêt
I didn't dance yet	Itor kêt
I didn't lie down	Inõr kêt
I didn't take bath	Idjwỳr kêt
I didn't go down	Irwỳk kêt
I didn't cry	Imỳr kêt
I didn't sleep	Inhõt kêt
Did you go?	Djãm arỳm ne ga tẽ?
ne ga to? Did you danced?	Djãm arỳm
Did you lie down?	Djãm arỳm ne ga nõ?
ne ga djuw? Did you take bath?	Djãm arỳm
ne ga ruw? Did you go down?	Djãm arỳm
ne ga muw? Did you cry?	Djãm arỳm
Did you sleep?	Djãm arỳm ne ga ngõr?
I went to the farm	Purmã ne ba tẽ
You went to the farm	Purmã ne ga tẽ
and we) went to the farm	Purmã ne gu tẽ We (me
He went to the farm	Purmã ne tẽ
She went to the farm	Purmã ne tẽ
I didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ba itẽm kêt
You didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ga atẽm kêt
and you) didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne gu batẽm kêt We (me
He didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ba tẽm
She didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ba tẽm
I didn't go	Itẽm kêt
bit I just went	Itẽm
I went and I'm not coming back anymore	Itẽm kumrẽx
I didn't dance	Itor kêt
bit I just dance	Itor
kumre:x I danced for a long time	Itor
mex I danced well	Itor
I didn't lie down	Inõr kêt
bit I just lie down	Inõr
I didn't take bath	Idjwyr kêt
mex I took a very good bath	Idjwyr
kume:x I took bath for a long time	Idjwyr
I didn't go down	Irwỳk kêt
bit I just go down	Irwỳk
I didn't cry	Imỳr kêt
bit I just cry	Imỳr
kume:x I cried a lot	Imỳr
I didn't sleep	Inhõt kêt
bit I just sleep	Inhõt
mex I slept well	Inhõt
Actually, I didn't go	Itẽm kêtkumrẽx
Didn't I go?	Djãm itẽm kêtgot!
I went to the village	Krĩ'ỳr ne ba tẽ
I went to the village, far away	Mum krĩ'ỳr ne ba tẽ
I went to the village, very far from here	Onij krĩrax'ỳr ne ba tẽ.
ne ba to I danced in the direction of the house	Kikre'ỳr
ne ba to I danced in the direction of the house, far away	Mum kikre'ỳr
ne ba to I danced in the direction of the house, very far from here	Onij kikre rax'ỳr
ne ba djuw I took a shower quickly	Tebê
ne ba djuw I bathed in the stream.	Ngo màtkam
ruw I went down	Ba
ne ba ruw I went down very quickly	Tebê
ne ba ruw I went down in the river	Ngo màtkam
I didn't arrive	Ibôx kêt.
I didn't sink	Inox kêt.
I didn't fall	Itỹm kêt.
I arrived	Ba bôx.
nox. I sank	Ba
I fell	Ba tỹm.
Did you arrive?	Djãm arỳm ne ga bôx?
ne ga nox? Did you sink?	Djãm arỳm
Did you fall?	Djãm arỳm ne ga tỹm?
No, I didn't arrive yet	Kati. Ibôx kêt rã'ã
No, I didn't sink yet	Kati. Inox kêt rã'ã
No, I didn't fall yet	Kati. Itỹm kêt rã'ã
Did you arrive?	Djãm arỳm ne ga bôx?
ne ga nox? Did you sink?	Djãm arỳm
Did you fall?	Djãm arỳm ne ga tỹm?
yes, I already arrived	Aã, arỳrm ne ba bôx
ne ba nox yes, I already sank	Aã, arỳrm
yes, I already fell	Aã, arỳrm ne ba tým
small group) went to the farm	Purmã ne bar mõ We (a
small group) went to the farm	Purmã ne gar mõ You all (a
and you) went to the farm	Purmã ne gwaj mõ We (me
small group) went to the farm	Purmã ne ar mõ They (a
small group, except you) didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ar imõr kêt We (a
small group) didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ar amõr kêt You all (a
small group, including you and me) didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne gwaj bamõr kêt We (a
small group) didn't go to the farm	Purmã ne ar mõr kêt They (a
You fell in the mud	Ngy'ã ne ga tỹm
You fell by the riverbank	Ngô myrri ne ga tỹm.
Yesterday, my baby hurt me	Akamàtkam ne ikra àn
ngrirekam, na krakkam ne ruw As soon as it got dark, while it was raining heavily, my baby was born	Ne kam akamàt
ni ne ruw The baby was a girl	Ikra
The baby and my wife are doing well	Ikramẽ iprõ ne mexkumrẽx
already gotten tribal medicine for them	Me bengôkre djukane'ỳr ne ba tẽ I’ve
ngrire at dusk	akamàt
to feel labor pains	àn
the sound of something breaking	krar
the sound of something breaking	krak
I didn't tell everything about this	Idjujarẽnh kêt
I didn't spit	Idjàptõr kêt
I didn't chew it	Idjũmjanh kêt
I told everything about this	Ba ajarẽ
apto I spat	Ba
I chewed it	Ba ũmja
Did you tell everything about this?	Djã ne ga ajarẽ?
Did you spit?	Djã ne ga aptô?
Did you chew iy?	Djã ne ga ũmja?
Yes, I told everything about it	Ãã. Ba ajarẽ.
Yes, I spat	Ãã. Ba aptô.
Yes, I chewed it	Ãã. Ba ũmja.
We all went to work in the fields	Purmã ne ba me mõ.
big group) went to work in the fields	Purmã ne ba me mõ. We (a
You all went to work in the fields	Purmã ne ga me mõ.
big group) went to work in the fields	Purmã ne ga me mõ. You (a
and you) and everyone else went to work in the fields	Purmã ne gu me mõ. We (me
They all went to work in the fields	Purmã ne me mõ.
big group) went to work in the fields	Purmã ne me mõ. They (a
you) didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me imôr kêt. We all (except
big group except you) didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me imôr kêt. We (a
You all didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me amõr kêt.
big group) didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me amõr kêt. You (a
and me) didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me bamõr kêt. We (you
They all didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me mõr kêt.
big group) didn't go to work in the fields	Purmã ne me mõr kêt. They (a
I'm not running	Ipròt
I'm not crawling	Ikukwỳr
I'm not leaving	Ikator
I'm running	Ba iprõt
I'm crawling	Ba ikukwỳr
ikato I'm leaving	Ba
and me) went to the farm	Bar purmã te. We (someone
some others) went to the farm	Gar purmã te. You (and
and you) and other(s) went to the farm	Gwaj purmã te. We (me
I went early	Kryràm ne ba tẽ
So, my wife and me work in the fields	Ba kam iprõmẽ ar kam idjàpênh
After burning the field, I cut the branches and threw them along its edges	Kwỳ, ba kam pa jakàn o mrãn akà'ã kurẽ
kam kam kre I completely cleared the field to plant in it, and then I planted it	Prĩne djwỳmã karên
kre. I planted cara, bananas, papaya, sugar cane, corn, tobacco and watermelon	Môpmẽ tyrtimẽ katẽbàrmẽ katẽmẽ. Kadjwatimẽ bàymẽ kadjàtmẽ karinhômẽ katẽtàmkurmẽ
I have already finished planting and the seeds germinated	Arỳm kam kre pa nhym arỳm ingrõt
ne They germinated and are growing	Arỳm ingrõn abatành
in the borders of	akà'ã
to cut off completely	akàr
to cut off completely	akà
I didn't play an instrument	Ije kakôr kêt
I didn't scratch it	Ije kakrẽnh kêt
I didn't sweep	Ije kapõnh kêt
I didn't weed it	Ije kapõnh kêt
I didn't scream	Ije karêr kêt
I didn't peel it	Ije kudjônh kêt
I played an instrument	Ba kakô
I scratched it	Ba kakrê
I swept it	Ba kapõ
I weeded it	Ba karê
I screamed	Ba kà
I peeled it	Ba kudjô
I didn't sweep yet	Ije kapõnh kêt rã'ã.
You didn't sweep yet	Aje kapõnh kêt rã'ã.
and me) didn't sweep yet	Gu baje kapõnh kêt rã'ã. We (you
He didn't sweep yet	Kute kapõnh kêt rã'ã.
She didn't sweep yet	Kute kapõnh kêt rã'ã.
I'm ready to weed it now	Ije karêr 'ỳr
mex I weeded it well	Ije karêr
I'm going to do some weeding	Ije karêr mã
I didn't weed with a machete	Ije pur karêr kêt
weed the field with a machete	Ije kàxo karêr kêt I didn’t
I didn't weed around the house	Ije kikre bu'ã karêr kêt
I weeded with a machete	Ba kàxo karê
I weeded the field with a machete	Ba kàxo pur karê.
I weeded around the house	Ba kikre bu'ã karê
I didn't try the food	Ije kaki kêt.
I didn't plant it	Ije kre kêt.
I didn't abandon him	Ije kanga kêt.
I didn't treat the disease	Ije kane kêt.
I didn't paint the body	Ije 'ôk kêt.
I didn't knock	Ije kaprêprêk kêt.
kaki. I tried the food	Ba
kre. I planted it	Ba
kanga. I abandoned him	Ba
kane. I treated the disease	Ba
I painted the body	Ba 'ôk.
I knocked	Ba kaprêprêk.
ne ga kaki? Why did you try the food?	Mỳkam
ne ga kre? Why did you plant it?	Mỳkam
ne ga kanga? Why did you abandon him?	Mỳkam
ne ga kanga? Why did you abandon her?	Mỳkam
ne ga kane? Why did you try the treated the disease?	Mỳkam
Why did you painted the body?	Mỳkam ne ga 'ôk?
Why did you knock?	Mỳkam ne ga kaprêprêk?
You're almost treating the disease	Aje kane 'ỳr
kane mex You treated well the disease	Aje
You pretend to treat the disease.	Aje kane mã
You didn't hurt me	Aje ikaprêprêk kêt
I didn't hurt you	Ije akaprêprêk kêt
I painted you	Ba ajôk
I painted you carefully	Ba prĩne ajôk
pur dji Everyone help me clean the field	Me kunĩ ne me imã
At the beginning of the drought, the men go to the new fields and brush the bushes	Amex totokbê ne me my pur'ỳr mrãn par prã
Then, they cut the trees	Ne kam kam kukà
ba me kam kum angij They leave them there until they are completely dry, and then they burn them	Nhym kam nõn kam ngrà
The fields are burned.	Nhym kam kwỳn.
already set fire to them.	Nã bãm me kum angij We’ve
Then, we brush them again and remove the small stumps	Ne kam ajte karên krax rê.
Soon after we burned the field, we weed'in preparation for planting	Kwỳ totokbê ne ba me amĩm djwỳmã karê
already planted everything	Ne arỳm kam djwỳ kre So far, we’ve
angij set fire to	kum
set fire to	angjênh
to weed the undergrowth beneath the trees	par prã
I didn't look for meat	Ije mry jabej kêt
a tool)	Ije mry janhĩ kêt I didn’t remove the meat (with
I didn't whisper for my son	Ije ikra nhigo kêt
I didn't paint my son's cheeks	Ije ikra jajtẽk kêt
fletch the arrow.	Ije kruw nhimrô kêt I didn’t
I don't do the house	Ije kikre nhipêx kêt
I didn't look for it	Ije abej kêt
a tool)	Ije anhĩ kêt I didn’t remove it (with
I didn't whisper for him	Ije igo kêt
I didn't whisper for her	Ije igo kêt
I didn't paint it	Ije ajtẽk kêt
I fletched it	Ije imrô kêt
I do it	Ije ipêx kêt
He didn't look for it	Kute abej kêt
He's almost looking for it	Kute abej 'ỳr
He's going to look for it	Kute abej mã
I didn't fletch it for you	Ije amã imrô kêt
take the meat out of the bowl	Ije ngônhkam mry janhĩ kêt I didn’t
I didn't look for the meat in the woods for you	Ije amã bàkam mry jabej kêt
I didn't cut the firewood	Ije pĩ jakàr kêt
I didn't look for the firewood	Ije pĩ jamỳnh kêt
I didn't hang the firewood	Ije pĩ janhôr kêt
I didn't cut it	Ije akàr kêt
I didn't look for it	Ije amỳnh kêt
I didn't hang it	Ije anhôr kêt
I cut the firewood	Ba pĩ jakà
I looked for the firewood	Ba pĩ jamỳ
I hung the firewood	Ba pĩ janhô
I cut it	Ba akà
I looked for it	Ba 'amỳ
I hung it	Ba anhô
I didn't scary you	Ije ajaêr kêt.
I didn't talk about you	Ije ajarẽnh kêt.
I didn't order you	Ije ajanor kêt.
I didn't scary him	Ije aêr kêt
I didn't scary her	Ije aêr kêt
I didn't talk about it	Ije arẽnh kêt
I didn't order this	Ije anor kêt
I scaried you	Ba ajaê.
I talked about you	Ba ajarẽ.
ajano. I ordered you	Ba
I scaried he	Ba aê.
I scaried her	Ba aê.
I talked about this	Ba arẽ
ano. I ordered this	Ba
I went to the woods	Bàkam ne ba tẽ
I crossed the river and left, and a tapir passed by me	Ba ngôja'ã rẽn tẽn ane nhym kukryt mõ.
I said with me	Ba kam amĩm
ane yay, I'll kill that tapir	Je, ba kukrytja mãn bĩ,
So I follow her with my dog	Ne kam ate kôt ropreo tẽ
I took my dog and left, and the tapir got close of the fruitful tree	Ropreo tẽ:n ane nhym pidjôja'ỳr bôx
kur o ba she stayed there eating the fruit	Ne kam ar kwỳ
follow her) and I went up after her	Nhym ropreja kubã ba kam kôt wabi The dog sniffed her (and
the dog left and follow her	Ropreja mã kubãno tẽ
o dja he harassed the tapir	Arỳm
ne I ran	Ba kam'ỳr iprõt
I killed her	Ba kam kubĩ
at that moment	ate
I didn't smell it	Ije bãr kêt.
I didn't kill	Ije par kêt.
I didn't kill	Ije bĩn kêt.
I smelled it	Ba kubã.
kupa. I killed	Ba
I killed	Ba kubĩ.
I didn't hear the animals' sound	Ije mry bãr kêt.
I heared the animals' sound	Ije mry bã kêt.
I didn't kill those peccaries	Ije angrôwa par kêt
I didn't save the dog	Ije ropre pytàr kêt.
I didn't save it	Ije 'utàr kêt
They are going to get thatch	Ar kikrekadjy bô'ỳr tẽ
kabi pa. They're going to choose thatch and finish with it	Rikre kabio tẽ:n arỳm
Soon after, they cut the bundles of thatch	Ne kam ate kum kàro tẽ.
pa They keep going until they cut all of them	Kum kàro tẽ:n kam arỳm kum kàr
Walking one behind the other, they carry the thatch to the clearing	Ne kam ar ate kapôtmã o apôxo ba:n arỳmo bôx
dja. Then, they all open the thatch leaves.	Ne ate kadjy kabôo
When they finish, they carry the thatch to the river, load it into the canoe, and pile it up inside	Bô kabô pan ate kà'ỳro ba, ne kàkam kumẽ.
for the purpose of	kadjy
I brought the deer early	Kryràm ne ba ngijãdjy o tẽ
I brought him early	Kryràm ne ba o tẽ
I brought her early	Kryràm ne ba o tẽ
I brought it early	Kryràm ne ba o tẽ
I didn't brought it early	Kryràm ne ije o itẽm kêt
hind legs are short, and its front legs are short too	Krokrokre ne kjê'i krã:nne, pa krã:nne The honey-eater’s
jaka:re. Its head is white	Ne kam krã
kam amy jakrita. Its tail is thick and hairy	Ne
It looks like the black monkey	Kute ijêkre jamypyràk
kam kuka po:nhre. The honey-eater's head is flat.	Ne
krokrokre menhbit ku. He likes honey	Ne
kate, ne kam kuku He scratches the tree until he makes a hole in it, and then eats the honey	Ne kam pĩ kakrê:n 'ã
mex During the night, Kokoti was feeling good	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
mex Last night, Kokoti was feeling good	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
ngryk During the night, Kokoti was feeling angry	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
ngryk Last night, Kokoti was feeling angry	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
During the night, Kokoti was feeling sad	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kaprĩre
Last night, Kokoti was feeling sad	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kaprĩre
rerekre During the night, Kokoti was feeling weak	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
rerekre Last night, Kokoti was feeling good	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
katyk During the night, Kokoti was feeling tired	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
katyk Last night, Kokoti was feeling tired	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
During the night, Kokoti was feeling sick	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kanê
Last night, Kokoti was feeling sick	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kanê
During the night, Kokoti was feeling strong	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti tỳx
Last night, Kokoti was feeling strong	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti tỳx
punu During the night, Kokoti was feeling bad	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
punu Last night, Kokoti was feeling bad	Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti
is) feeling well?	Mỳj me'õ ne mex? Who is (that
Are you tractable?	Djã ne ga adjuwabô?
Are you kind?	Djã ne ga adjukaprĩ?
ne ga adjukanga? Are you lazy?	Djã
aren't really lazy	Me ukanga kêtkumrẽx They (all)
I'm not willingly to eat meat	Ijamrex kêt
I'm not bad	Ijaxwe kêt
I'm not satisfied	Ijajne kêt
ne ga ajamrex? Are you willingly to eat meat?	Djã
ne ga ajaxwe? Are you bad?	Djã
ne ga ajajne? Are you satisfied?	Djã
He's a little mean	Axwere
He's really bad	Axwekumrẽx
He isn't really bad	Axwe kêtkumrẽx
The people really like the meat fat	Mry twỳm ne me axwe kum ành
When someone is roasting the meat, the fat burns	Me mry djàr o dja, ne kam twỳm kunĩ xêr
But the deeper layers of fat remain protected	Kà kadjwỳnhbêbit twỳm rã'ã
The people really like the roasted meat fat	Me kunĩ axwe kum mry twỳm djành.
stone oven)	djàr roast (in
stone oven)	kuga roast (in
That one is hungry	Ta ne kum prãm
That one likes this	Ta ne kum kĩnh
ne kum uma That one is scaried	Ta
That one penalizes himself	Ta ne kum kaprĩ
and me) are really hungry	Djãm gu bamã prãm kêtgot We (you
and me) like this	Djãm gu bamã prãm kĩnh We (you
and me) are scared	Djãm gu bamã prãm uma We (you
this one)	Djãm gu bamã prãm kaprĩ We (you and me) feel sorry (for
and me) really like this	Djãm gu bamã prãm ành We (you
That one is hungry	Ta ne kum prãm
That one like this	Ta ne kum kĩnh
ne kum uma That one is scaried	Ta
That one really like this	Ta ne kum ành
are hungry	Mrãmri ne ar kum prãm. It's true that they (few)
and you) and few are hungry	Mrãmri ne gwaj bamã prãm. It's true that we (me
you) are hungry	Mrãmri ne me imã prãm It's true that we all (except
It's true that you all are hungry.	Mrâmri ne me amã prãm
It's true that they all are hungry	Mrãmri ne memã prãm
and you) plus everyone are hungry	Mrãmri ne me bamã prãm. It's true that we (me
ga ama. I'll explain something for you	Dja ba amã mỳjja jarẽ
My father is the chief	Ibãm ne kubê bẽnjadjwỳr.
One of my brothers is the leader of the dances	Nhym kam ikamy'õ ne me tor djwỳnh.
One of my great uncles is the leader of the chants	Nhym inhingêt 'õ ne ngre nhõ djwỳnh.
He knows all of the chants very well	Kute me ngrer kunĩ mar mexkumrẽx
I already told this to you	Tãm ne ba arỳm amã arẽ
leader of the dances in a festival	me tor djwỳnh
leader of the chants in a festival	ngre nhõ djwỳnh
I'm the chief	Ibê bẽnjadjwỳr
I'm a pilot	Ibê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh
You're the leader of the chants	Abê ngre nhõ djwỳnh
He's a pilot	Kubê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh
and me) pilots	Gu babê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh We're (you
except you) chiefs.	Ar ibê bẽnjadjwỳr We're (few,
the one who makes headdress	me àkà nhipêx djwỳnh
this is a stone	kẽnneja
this is a canoe	kàneja
this is a paper	pi'ôkneja
Is this a stone?	Djãm kẽnneja?
No, this is a piece of wood	Kati. Pĩnewa
Has he already gone?	Djãm arỳm ne tẽ?
Who was?	Nhym ne tẽ?
He already gone	Arỳm ne tẽ.
Why did he go?	Mỳkam ne tẽ?
He went right now	Ajbir ne tẽ.
Who was?	Mỳj me'õ ne tẽ?
Did he go?	Djã ne tẽ?
amex? Are you feeling well?	Djãm
ne mex? Who's feeling well?	Nhym
ne punu? Why are you feeling bad?	Mỳkam
ne mex? Who's feeling well?	Mỹj me'õ
ne ga o dja? What are you doing?	Mỳj
o dja I'm cooking	Nã bãm õmrõ
What food is it?	Mỳj õmrõnewa?
It's venice with flour.	Ngijãdjymẽ djwỳ ngrà.
touch it.	É, akmere. Kwarĩk wãnh kupênh kêt Look, akmere. Don’t
ne kangro:. The food is very hot.	Õmrõ
It'll burn your hand!	Dja ga anhikra xêr!
dja. Go over there!	Dja ga rũm
dji. I will put the food in that shelf nearby you.	Pĩponh wa'ã dja ba õmrõ
Be careful!	Kum aprĩ!
It's going to spill.	Dja ajkapĩ.
to touch with hands	kupênh
to touch with hands	kupê
to be burned	xêt
to be burned	xêr
akato! Get out!	On
nox! Dive in!	On
kre! Plant it!	On
Don't touch	Kwarĩk wãnh kupênh kêt!
dja! Get out of there!	Rũm
dja! Get out of there!	Mũm
Keep doing it!	Arek o tẽ!
wa! Go ahead of me!	Imã
Come here!	Amrẽ tẽ!
Bring it!	Amrẽ o tẽ!
Do it again!	Ajte!
Repeat what you said!	Ajte arẽ!
Look what I have!	Ota!
dja! Stand up!	Kàjmã
ropno? Maria, where's your flashlight?	Maria, nãr anhõ
He's at home	Inhũrkwãkam ne nõ
She's at home	Inhũrkwãkam ne nõ
I don't have a flashlight	Inhõ ropno kêt
This night you give me your flashlight and I will hunt with it, is it OK?	Akamàt kam dja ga imã anhõ ropno ngã, ba kam kôt tẽ, nẽn?
Look, do you have batteries?	Ẽ, djãm anhõ ropno kadjwỳnh?
rerekre. Mine are weak.	Inhõ ne arỹm
My batteries are strong	Inhõ ropno kadjwỳnh ne mexkumrẽx
Then I go	Arỳm ne ba itẽmmã
Kill an animal soon	On dja ga mry 'õnh bĩ
When I arrive, I'll give a piece to you	Gê dja ba o bôx ne kam amã kwỳ ngã
to hold something in the hands	byr
to hold something in the hands	kuby
my own home	inhũrkwã
to kill something	'õnh bĩ
kikre neja It's my house	Inhõ
neja It's my pot	Inhõ ngônh
kax neja It's my basket	Inhõ
pur neja It's my farm	Inhõ
neja It's my cloth	Inhõ kubẽkà
neja It's my machete	Inhõ kàx
karaxu neja It's my spoon	Inhõ
kikre neja. It's your house	Anhõ
neja. It's your cloth	Anhõ kubẽkà
neja. It's his pot.	Õ ngônh
kikre newa? Whose house is that?	Nhym nhõ
kikre neja It's my house	Inhõ
kikre neja It's your house	Anhõ
kikre neja It's his house	Õ
kikre neja It's our house	Ar inhõ
Do you have papaya?	Djori anhõ katẽbar?
Is there papaya?	Djori anhõ katẽbar?
Do you have pumpkin?	Djori anhõ katẽ?
Is there pumpkin?	Djori anhõ katẽ?
Do you have flour?	Djori anhõ djwỳ ngrà?
Is there flour?	Djori anhõ djwỳ ngrà?
I don't have papaya	Inhõ katêbàr kêt.
I don't have pumpkin	Inhõ katẽ kêt.
I don't have flour	Inhõ katẽ djwỳ ngrà.
No, there isn't.	Kati. Kêt.
neja. It's my head	Ikrã
neja. It's my leg	Ite
neja. It's my eye	Ino
neja. It's my arm	Ipa
neja. It's my stomach	Itik
neja. It's my hand	Inhikra
neja. It's my mouth	Ijajkwa
neja. It's my wife	Iprõ
neja. It's my brother	Ikamy
neja. It's my mother	Inã
neja. It's my son	Ikra
neja. It's my daughter	Ikra
neja. It's my father	Ibãm
neja. It's your head	Akrã
neja. It's your leg	Ate
neja. It's your eye	Ano
neja. It's your arm	Apa
neja. It's your stomach	Atik
neja. It's your hand	Anhikra
neja. It's your mouth	Ajajkwa
neja. It's your wife	Aprõ
neja. It's your brother	Akamy
neja. It's your mother	Anã
neja. It's your son	Akra
neja. It's your daughter	Akra
neja. It's your father	Abãm
neja. It's Kokoti's head	Kôkôti krã
te neja. It's Kokoti's leg	Kôkôti
no neja. It's Kokoti's eye	Kôkôti
pa neja. It's Kokoti's arm	Kôkôti
tik neja. It's Kokoti's stomach	Kôkôti
nhikra neja. It's Kokoti's hand	Kôkôti
jajkwa neja. It's Kokoti's mouth	Kôkôti
neja. It's Kokoti's wife	Kôkôti prõ
kamy neja. It's Kokoti's brother	Kôkôti
neja. It's Kokoti's mother	Kôkôti nã
kra neja. It's Kokoti's son	Kôkôti
neja. It's Kokoti's daughter	Kôkôti krã
neja. It's Kokoti's father	Kôkôti bãm
neja. It's his head	Krã
neja. It's his leg	Te
neja. It's his eye	No
neja. It's his arm	Pa
neja. It's his stomach	Tik
neja. It's his hand	Nhikra
neja. It's his mouth	Jajkwa
neja. It's his wife	Prõ
neja. It's his brother	Kamy
neja. It's his mother	Nã
neja. It's his son	Kra
neja. It's his daughter	Kra
neja. It's his father	Bãm
tokry? Do you have headache?	Djãm akrãkam
atikkam tokry? Do you have stomach ache?	Djãm
tokry. Yes, I have headache	Ãã Ikrãkam
Itikkam tokry. Yes, I have stomach ache	Ãã
ate punu? Is your leg bad?	Djãm
Ite punu. Yes, my leg is bad.	Ãã.
Who is your mother	Nhym na anã?
neja. She's my mother	Inã
The one who is standing	Ta ne ãmja.
neja. It's my father.	Ibãm
neja. It's my leg.	Ite
ropre neja. It's my dog.	Inhõ
kikre neja. It's my house.	Inhõ
Maria, are you sad?	Maria, djãm akaprĩre?
You seem sad	Kute akaprĩpyràk
Yes, I'm sad	Ãã, ikaprĩre
My son is sick and that's why I'm sad	Ikra kanêkam ne ba ikaprĩre
Have already you looked for his medicine?	Djãm arỳm ne ga õ pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ?
mex I have already looked for medicine for him and he got a little better	Ikrakadjyne ba pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ nhym arỳm kàjbê
What's his illness?	Mỳj kanê?
He has fever and cough.	Kangrokammẽ kakkam kanê.
dja akra mex jabej. Let's see if he get better tomorrow.	Akatibê gê
mex. Yes, maybe he'll be fine by tomorrow.	Ãã, birãm akatibê nhym arỳm
I'm sad because you're leaving.	Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because my house burned.	Inhõ kikre xêt kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because my husband is angry	Imjên djàkre kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because my tobbaco is destroyed	Inhõ karinhô o bikẽnh kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because my beads are stolen	Inhõ angà ibê biknor kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because my beads are lost	Inhõ angà ibê biknor kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because you're leaving	Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.
I'm sad because you're leaving	Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.
ne ga muw? Why are you crying?	Mỳkam
Why are you tired?	Mỳkam ne ga atykdjà?
Why did you stay seated?	Mỳkam ne ga arek nhỹ?
ne ba muw I'm crying because my son is sick	Ikra kanêkam
I'm tired because my son is sick	Ikra kanêkam ne ba itykdjà
I stay seated because my son is sick	Ikra kanêkam ne ba arek nhỹ
Why did you go to the woods?	Mỳjkadjy ne ga bà'ỳr tẽ?
I went to the woods to hunt	Mry Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.
I went to the woods to fetch fruits	Pidjô Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.
I went to the woods to get arrow materials	Kruw Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.
I went to the woods to get genipap	Mrôti Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.
I went to the woods to get honey	Menh Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.
What did you go look for medicine for?	Mỳjkadjy ne ga pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ?
What did you go to the woods for?	Mỳjkadjy ne ga bà?
kikre? What did you go home for?	Mỳjkadjy ne ga anhõ
What did you go to farm for?	Mỳjkadjy ne ga purmã?
I went look for medicine for my son	Ikra Kadjy ne ba pidjy'ỳr tẽ
I went hunting	Mry Kadjy ne ba bà
kikre I went home for working	Idjàpênh Kadjy ne ba inhõ
I went to get yam	Môp Kadjy ne ba purmã
I went with the purpose of hunting	Ije mrj jabej mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ
I went with the purpose of straightening an arc	Ije djudjê kênh mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ
I went with the purpose of cutting firewood	Ije pi mẽnh mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ
I went with the purpose of fetching bee honey	Ije mẽnh nhõpô mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ
I went with the purpose of opening straw	Ije bô kabôr mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ
I went yesterday.	Amũ akati ja'ã ne ba tẽ.
I went Monday.	Pi'ôk tyk ny'ã ne ba tẽ.
I went Saturday.	Pi'õk ràràr'ã ne ba tẽ.
I went Sunday.	Pi'ôk kamrêk'ã ne ba tẽ.
I went today.	Akati ja'ã ne ba tẽ.
I went a long time ago.	Amrẽbê ne ba tẽ.
I'll go tomorrow	Akatibê dja ba tẽ.
I'll go Monday	Pi'ôk tyk nykam dja ba tẽ.
I'll go Saturday	Pi'ôk ràràrkam dja ba tẽ.
I'll go Sunday	Pi'ôk kamrêkkam dja ba tẽ.
I'll go one of these days"	Akati'õkam dja ba tẽ.
flood season	ngô tàm
flood season	na tỹm
time when corn turns red	bày prỳ kamrêk
time when the corn dries	bày ngrà
ngo rainy season	kum
Early in the morning, the women went to the fields and the men went hunting	Kryràm ne me nire purmã mõ nhym me my mry jabej mõ
a.m., the women had already roasted the sweet potatoes, and when the sun was strong, they returned to the village	Nhym kam kàjmã myt nhỹrkam ne me nire arỳm jàt gan aringro tỳxkam ajte krĩmã bôx By around 10:00
In the afternoon the women went to collect firewood.	Nhym myt ibô nhym kam pĩ ngrà'ỳr mõ.
They went looking for firewoods to roast the meat	Mry bôrkadjy me pĩ ngrà'ỳr mõ
Then in the afternoon, the men arrive from the woods	Nhym kam amykrykam ne me my bàkurũm bôx.
dja. At dusk, the women were roasting the meat.	Nhym kam me nire parakam arek mry djàro
Soon after dusk everyone were eating	Nhym akamàt ngrirekam me kunĩ 'õ kwỳ krẽno nhỹ
At night everyone slept	Nhym akamàt bar arek inhõto nõ
ngrire after dusk	akamàt
when the sun is hot	aringro tỳx
around ten o'clock	kàjmã myt nhỹr
When did you arrive?	Mỳj myt nhỳrkam ne ga bôx?
I arrived right now	Ajbir ne ba bôx.
I arrived in early morning	Kryràm ne ba bôx.
I arrived in the afternoon	Myt ibôkam ne ba bôx.
I arrived in the evening	Amykrykam ne ba bôx.
I arrived at dusk	Parakam ne ba bôx.
I arrived after dark	Akamàt ngrirekam ne ba bôx.
I arrived at night	Akamàtkam ne ba bôx.
Did you arrived now?	Djãm ajbir ne ga bôx?
almost at dawn	akati tẽ
late at night	akamàt kô ipôkri
newa? What's this?	Mỳj
neja. It's a pen.	Pi'ôk no'ôk djà
neja. It's a pencil.	Pi'ôk no'ôk djà
neja. It's a typewriter.	Titik djà
neja. It's a recorder.	Me kabẽn mar djà
neja. It's a radio.	Me kabẽn mar djà
neja. It's a sewing machine.	Kayr djà
neja. It's a saw.	Pĩ jakàr djà
neja. It's a sewing syringue	Me kamjỳr djà
They all arrived from city	Krĩraxkurũm ne me bôx
I arrived from the woods in early morning	Kryràm ne ba bàkurũm bôx
akno? Did you lose something?	Djã nã gãm mỳjjao
Well, I looking for my spoon and I don't find it	Bir, ba te inhõ karaxu jabej mrã.
o akno. Maybe my son have thrown away.	Birãm ikra ibê
abej? Have you looked at the table and around the house and on the way?	Djãm arỳm ne ga pĩponh'ã abejne kikre bu'ã abejne pry'ã
Yes, I have already examined everything.	Ãã, ba arỳm mỳjja kunĩ kamũ.
I looked in the basket and in the pot and I don't find it.	Ba arỳm kàkam ne ngônhkam abej ne kum ikator kêt.
What is that thing in the firewood?	Mỳj ne pĩ ngrà'ã mõ?
ne ja. That's the one.	Tãm
Now I'm happy.	Arỳm ne ba ikĩnh.
I looked only at the firewood pile but I didn't look on top of firewood	Pĩ ngrà parbêbit ne ba omũ. Pĩ ngrà nhiby'ã ne ije omũnh kêt.
Where's the pot?	Nhãr ngônh?
karaxu? Where's the spoon?	Nhãr
Where's the paper?	Nhãr pi'ôk no'ôk?
Where's the book?	Nhãr pi'ôk no'ôk?
Where's the shoes?	Nhãr parkà?
Where's the shotgun?	Nhãr katõk?
dja The pot is there	Wãnh ne ngônh
ne kawa dja. The pestle is there	Wãnh
The basket is there	Wãnh ne kà nõ
dja The gourd is there	Wãnh ne ngônh
The pot is there	Wãnh ne ngõkon wajêt
krakri ne dja It's below the basket	Kà
ne dja It's at the foot of the tree	Pĩ parbê
ne dja It's on the table	Pĩponh nhiby'ã
ne dja It's on the riverbank	Ngô mỳrri
ne dja It's next to the oven	Ki jatãri
It's over the fire.	Kuwy mỳrbè wajêt
No, the manchet is at the foot of the tree.	Kati. Pĩ parbê kàx nõ.
tyk. My son died to me.	Ikra ibê
My son is gone from me	Ikra ibê tẽ.
My son is fallen to me.	Ikra ibê tỹm.
tyk. My son died to him	Akra abê
My son is gone to him	Akra abê tẽ.
My son is fallen to him	Akra abê tỹm.
son died to him	Kôkôti kra kubê tyk. Kôkôti's
son is gone to him	Kôkôti kra kubê tẽ. Kôkôti's
son is fallen to him	Kôkôti kra kubê tỹm. Kôkôti's
tyk Someone died to him.	Mẽ'õ abê
tyk Someone died to me.	Mẽ'õ ibê
tyk Someone died to him.	Mẽ'õ kubê
tyk Someone died to him.	Mẽ'õ Kôkôtibê
tyk Someone died to him.	Mẽ'õ bẽnjadjwỳrbê
Someone stole my meat from me.	Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo akĩ.
mryo abdju. Someone hid my meat from me.	Me'õ ibê inhõ
Someone leave my meat from me.	Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo tẽ.
Someone destroy my meat from me.	Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo ajkẽ.
o akno? Did you lose something	Djã ne ga mỳjja
kum ikato Yes, I lose the smoking pipe, but I already found it	Warikokoja ne ba o aknon arỳm
nhidji o akno. I forgot your father's name.	ã bãm abãm
Where are you from?	Jãnh ne gar mõ?
What did you go for?	Mỳjkadjy ne gar mõ?
We went for fishing.	Ar ije tep o idjàbirmã ne bar mõ.
Did you go in vain and come back?	Djã ne gãm ar te mõn akubyn mõ?
kati! No way.	Ari
ne kumex! We find a lot of fish!	Tep
We brought the catfish, the piranha and the peacock bass.	Tep punũtimẽ tetyktimẽ tepikôt ne bar o mõ no bôx
Did they give you a fish?	Djãm arỳm ne me amã tep 'õ ngã?
No, they don't give me anything.	Kati. Me kuta imã õr kêt.
What a thing!	Je!
tep jano. I will send one to you with my son.	Ikrakôt dja ba amã
Where are you from?	Mỳjkurũm ne gar mõ?
We arrive from white earth region.	Pyka jaka bar mõ.
I'm going to the farm.	Purmã ne ba tẽ.
Where are you going to?	Jãm ne ga tẽ?
Where do you come from	Jãnh ne ga tẽ?
I'm come from the farm	Purkurũm ne ba tẽ
works with her mother	Kôkôti ne nã ro'ã àpênh. Kôkôti
works with her sister	Kôkôti ne kanikwỳnh ro'ã àpênh. Kôkôti
went to the river with him	Kôkôti ro'ã ngônhmã tẽ Kôkôti
went to the plane with him	Kôkôti ro'ã mànkà'ỳr tẽ Kôkôti
Are they few?	Djãm ngrêre?
Kumex. No, they're a lot	Kati.
They're a lot	Krãptĩ
Is he lean?	Djãm 'ire?
rax It's large	Kre
kute? How is it the alligattor way	___, mỳj ne mĩkam
punu the alligattor is ugly	Mĩne
He has thick legs and a long mouth.	Nãm kjêti. Nãm inhu jabjê.
He has a long tail too.	Nãm amy jabjê.
During the day, he keeps his eyes closed	Nãm a'uri no mjõto ikwã.
mexgot! The alligator isn't a good thing, no.	Djãm mĩ
ne Yes, we run afraid of the alligator	Nà, bar mĩ pymaje prõt
me kute kur? Did we eat him?	Djãm
No, we don't eat him	Kati. Me kute kur kêt.
kute? How is it the coati way?	Mỳj ne wakõkam
ne The coati has red hair	Wakõ ne kĩ kamrêk
Some has red hairs and others has black hairs underneath.	Kwỳ kĩ kamrêk ne kwỳ kĩ krakri kakrãtyk.
me kute kur? Did we eat him?	Djãm
Me kute kur. Yes, we eat him	Nà.
kute? How much does it cost?	Mỳj ne pãnh
kute? How much does the arc cost?	Mỳj ne djudjê pãnh
ne nhidji kute? What is his name?	Mỳj
ne nhidji kute? What is that one's name?	Mỳj
ne ga tawa on? How do you do that thing?	Mỳj
on? How do you do your work?	Mỳj ne ga adjàpênh
kaba. I took some cara for you.	Ba amã môp
kaba. I took some cara for me.	Ba amĩm môp
amim kuby. I got it for me.	Ba
amim kay. I sewed it for me.	Ba
aben tak They fought	Me
They talked	Me abenmã kabẽn
They planned	Me abenmã 'ã karõ
abenkam ngryk They got angry	Me
ne The grandmas go to them and they talk about their children.	Me kwatỳnh me'ỳr ban bôx ne kam me kra'ã memã kabẽn
ne The aunts go to them and they talk about their children.	Me kwatỳnh me'ỳr ban bôx ne kam me kra'ã memã kabẽn
Then they dance to honor the children.	Nhym me kam me êje tor krĩ.
kum, So I ask him,	Nã bãm
meat did they end the party with? Was it with tortoise?" Then,	Mỳj'ã ne me amĩjaprã? Djãm kaprãn'ã? ane. Nhym kam, "What
they went looking for fish to use as food for the party climax"	Kati. Nãm me ate amrẽ me'õ'ã tep'ỳr tẽ. "No,
kam kum, I told him	Ba
was the child honored in the party?"	Mỳj me'õ kra djêje ne me amĩjaprã? ane. Nhym kam "Whose
that was honored in the party."	Be, ar àtẽk djêje ne me amĩjaprã. "Well, it was their àtẽk
make the highlight of a party	amĩjaprã
ne me keket? Who are they laughing at?	Mỳj me'õ'ã
Who are they talking about?	Mỳj me'õ'ã ne me kabẽn?
ne me keket They're laughing at the child	Kra'ã
They're talking about the child	Kra'ã ne me kabẽn
What did they end the party with	Mỳj'ã ne me amĩjaprã?
They ended it with the tortoise.	Kaprãn'ã ne me amĩjaprã.
They ended it with the jawbone.	Angrô ne me amĩjaprã.
They ended it with the jawbone.	Tep ne me amĩjaprã.
They ended it with the meat.	Mry ne me amĩjaprã.
told about him.	Kôkôti ne 'ã kabẽn. Kôkôti
told about me.	Kôkôti ne ijã kabẽn. Kôkôti
told about you.	Kôkôti ne ajã kabẽn. Kôkôti
told about them.	Kôkôti ne me'ã kabẽn. Kôkôti
got angry	Kôkôti ne 'ã ngryk. Kôkôti
planned it.	Kôkôti ne 'ã karõ. Kôkôti
asked for it.	Kôkôti ne 'ã ku'uw. Kôkôti
open it.	Kôkôti ne 'ã kuta. Kôkôti
threw it for him.	Kôkôti ne 'ã kudja. Kôkôti
ne ga o akamy? Who do you call brother?	Mỳj me'õ
Who do I call mother?	Mỳj me'õ ne ba o nã?
call father?	Mỳj me'õ ne Kôkôti o bãm? Who does Kôkôti
ne ga o akamy? Who do you call brother?	Mỳj me'õ
my brother	Kôkôti ne ba ije o ikamy. I call Kôkôti
my mother	Kôkôti ne ba ije o inã. I call Kôkôti
my father	Kôkôti ne ba ije o ibãm. I call Kôkôti
I call him my father	Ije o ibãm.
You call him my father	Aje o abãm.
He calls him my father	Kute o bãm.
Who was it?	Nhym nã tẽ?
I went myself	Ba ne ba tẽ
I arrived myself	Ba ne ba bôx
I told it myself	Ba ne ba ikabẽn
I killed him myself	Ba ne ba kubĩ
I worked myself	Ba ne ba idjàpênh
I weeded it myself	Ba ne ba karê
Only I went	Ba ajbit ne ba tẽ.
Only I arrived	Ba ajbit ne ba bôx.
Only I spoke	Ba ajbit ne ba ikabẽn.
Only I killed him	Ba ajbit ne ba kubĩ.
Only I worked	Ba ajbit ne ba idjàpênh.
Only I weeded	Ba ajbit ne ba karê.
Only I arrived	Ba ajbit ne ba bôx.
We went and you arrived.	Bar tẽ, ga kam bôx.
You went and we arrived.	Ga tẽ, bar kam bôx.
We all went and you all arrived.	Ba me tẽ, gar kam bôx.
You all went and we all arrived.	Ga me tẽ, ba me kam bôx.
You went and we all arrived.	Gar tẽ, ba me kam bôx.
We went than he arrived	Bar tẽ nhym kam bôx.
We all went than the boss arrived	Ba me tẽ nhym kam bẽnjadjwỳr bôx.
You went than they arrived	Gar tẽ nhym kam ar bôx.
You went than the airplane arrived	Gar tẽ nhym kam mànkà bôx.
lay down groaning	Nhym kam me'õja, mak kute kanhwỳrja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was stung by the scorpion —
lay down groaning	Nhym kam me'õja, ropre kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the dog —
lay down groaning	Nhym kam me'õja, ropkrori kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the ounce —
lay down groaning	Nhym kam me'õja, mĩ kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the alligator —
arrived soon after us.	Nhym me'õ abatànhja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the big one -
arrived soon after us.	Nhym me'õ prêkja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the tall one -
arrived soon after us.	Nhym me'õ katykja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the tired one -
arrived soon after us.	Nhym me'õ partãtãkja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the one whose feet was hurting -
be Are you seeing it?	Tô
Are you seeing it?	be
Are you seeing it?	Tuka
Are you seeing it?	tukwa
What's it!	Je tô mỳj nã
What's it!	Djô mỳj nã
I went to the plateau.	Kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.
I took my dogs.	Inhõ kritteo tẽ.
o dja. The the dogs were behind an anteater and cornered him.	Nhym kam pàtjao mõn
Then I killed him.	Ba kam kubĩ.
After I come back carrying him in my back and arrived.	Ne kam akubyn kutuno mõno bôx.
Then the other asked me	Nhym kam me imã,
ane. Ba kam kum, Where did you go? And I answered him.	Jãm ne ga tẽ?
I went to the plateau	Kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.
mry kumex, ane. There is a lot of hunting there	Onijkam
ane. So I told them	Ã memã
I killed the anteater with the shotgun	Ba katõko pàt bĩ.
I killed the anteater with the staff	Ba kôo pàt bĩ.
I killed the anteater with the stone	Ba kẽno pàt bĩ.
I killed the anteater with the arrow	Ba kruwo pàt bĩ.
I killed the anteater with a piece of wood	Ba pĩo pàt bĩ.
I went to the plateau far away.	Onij kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.
I killed the anteater with that good shotgun.	Katõk mexjao ne ba pàtja kubĩ.
knows a lot about the animals.	Kôkôti kute mry pumũnh mex ne. Kôkôti
When he goes hunting, he kill an animal soon.	Nãm bàkam ar mrã ne tebê mry 'õnh bĩ.
Does he only know things about the animals?	Djãm mrybit ne Kôkôti kute pumũnh?
kati! No way!	Ari
He knows how to weave the masks of the monkeys.	Nãm kukônh nhipêx pumũ.
He knows how to weave sleeping mats.	Nãm kute kupip kayr pumũnh
He knows how to do bows	Nãm kute djudjê nhipêx pumũnh.
really knows a lot!	Djãm Kôkôti kute mỳjja mar ngrigot! Kôkôti
He's very smart.	Djãm no punũgot!
to be foolish	no punũ
knows how to read.	Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh. Kôkôti
knows how to write.	Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh. Kôkôti
knows how the path.	Kôkôti kute pry pumũnh. Kôkôti
I know how to read.	Ba ije pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.
I know how to write.	Ba ije pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.
You know how to read.	Ga aje pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.
You know how to write.	Ga aje pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.
know the speeches?	Djãm Kôkôti kute kabẽn? Does Kôkôti
know the chants?	Djãm Kôkôti kute me ngrer mar? Does Kôkôti
know how to treat illnesses?	Djãm Kôkôti kute me kane? Does Kôkôti
ga aje me ngrer mar? Do you know tha chants.	Djãm
The food comes to be hot.	Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro mõ.
The corn comes to be dry.	Arỳm ne bày ngrâ mõ.
The corn comes to be red.	Arỳm ne bày kamrêk mõ.
The food comes to be tall.	Arỳm ne bày prêk mõ.
The kid comes to be fat.	Arỳm ne kra nhĩpti mõ.
The kid comes to be big.	Arỳm ne kra abatành mõ.
It becomes a hot day.	Arỳm ne aringro tỳx mô.
ne akati. It becomes the day.	Arỳm
It becomes the night.	Arỳm ne akamàt.
on! Let's go!	Gwaj
Wait until I finish eating, ok!	Ba inhõ kwỳ krẽn pamã.
Wait until I finish washing the dishes, ok!	Ba ngônh pyror põnh pamã.
Wait until I finish reading it, ok!	Ba pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh pamã.
arek dja. I stand up.	Ba
I sit down.	Ba arek nhỹ.
I lie down.	Ba arek nõ.
I usually stand up.	Ba arek iku'ê.
I usually sit down.	Ba arek krĩ.
I usually lie down.	Ba arek ikwã.
He's already gone	Arỳm ne tẽ.
You've already gone	Arỳm ne ga tẽ.
You and me have already gone	Arỳm ne gu tẽ.
I've already gone	Arỳm ne ba tẽ.
They've already gone	Arỳm ne me mõ.
You've already gone	Arỳm ne gar mõ.
You all have already gone	Arỳm ne ga me mõ.
We all have already gone	Arỳm ne ba me mõ.
You, me and everyone have already gone	Arỳm ne gu me mõ.
He's already entered in the house.	Arỳm ne kikrekam wadjà.
me kikrekam wangij. They've already entered in the house.	Arỳmne
to the detriment of	bê
ne kam kute? How is it the thing?	Mỳj
ne ga ta on? How do you do such a thing?	Mỳj
What do you want?	Mỳ?
Lie on your back.	Anhõ ka o nõ.
Lie on your stomach.	Atu mỳrbê tỹm ne nõ.
Close the eyes.	Ano ngõr.
Don't get it wet	Kum aprĩ gê ngo kêt.
Don't get it dirty.	O djuwamex. Kwarĩk wãnh ngo kêt gê kakrãtyk kêt.
Come back tomorrow.	Akati dja ga akubyn tẽ.
I have a cold.	Inhĩarop.
ikuw. I'm with dysentery.	Nã bãm
A snake stung me	Kangã ne inhã.
cassava flour	djwỳ ngrà
Let's start our work.	gu badjàpênho nhỹ
