ba muw  I cry
ba muw	I cried
ba ngõr I sleep
ba ngõr I slep
ba mrã	I walk
ba mrã	I walked
ga muw	you cry
ga muw	you cried
ga ngõr you sleep
ga ngõr you slept
ga mrã	you walk
ga mrã	you walked
kôkôti muw	kôkôti cry
kôkôti muw	kôkôti cried
kôkôti ngõr kôkôti sleep
kôkôti ngõr kôkôti slept
kôkôti mrã	kôkôti walk
kôkôti mrã	kôkôti walked
# muw	 he cries
# muw	 he cried
# ngõr	he sleeps
# ngõr	he slept
# mrã	 he walks
# mrã	 he walked
gu me muw	 we cry
gu me muw	 we cried
gu me ngõr	we sleep
gu me ngõr	we slept
gu me mrã	 we walk
gu me mrã	 we walked
ba me muw	 we cry
ba me muw	 we cried
ba me ngõr	we sleep
ba me ngõr	we slept
ba me mrã	 we walk
ba me mrã	 we walked
gar muw we cry
gar muw we cried
gar ngõr		we sleep
gar ngõr		we slept
gar mrã	 we walk
gar mrã	 we walked
me muw	they cry
me muw	they cried
me ngõr they sleep
me ngõr they slept
me mrã	they walk
me mrã	they walked
ba môp kaba I dig cará
ba jàt kaba I dig yams
ba kwỳr kaba I dig manioc
ba tyrti kaba I dig bananas
ba môp kaba I dig cará
ba krãtỳx ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs
ba kà kaba	I skinned the animal
ba karõ kaba		I took the photograph
ba krãtỳx ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs
ba krãtỳx ngre kaba I dig the turtle eggs
ba môp kaba I dug cará
ga môp kaba you dug cará
gwaj môp kaba	 we dug cará
gu me môp kaba	we dug cará
ar môp kaba they dug cará
me môp kaba they dug cará
ba môp kaba I dug cará
ba môp krẽ	I ate cará
ba môp kre	I planted cará
ba môp ga	 I baked cará in an earth oven
ba môp tu	 I carried cará in a basket
ba môp kaba I dug cará
Ba # kôo kubĩ	 I killed it with a stick
Ba # katõko kubĩ	 I killed it with a rifle
Ba # kruwo kubĩ	 I killed it with an arrow
Ba # kopo kubĩ	 I killed it with a club
Ba # kẽno kubĩ	 I killed it with a rock
Ba # kàxo kubĩ	 I killed it with a machete
ga # kàxo kubĩ	 you killed it with a machete
Kôkôti # kàxo kubĩ	 Kôkôti killed it with a machete
# # kàxo kubĩ	 He killed it with a machete
gar # kàxo kubĩ	 you killed it with a machete
ga me # kàxo kubĩ	 you killed it with a machete
me # kàxo kubĩ	 they killed it with a machete
ba # kàxo kaba	 I dug it with a machete
ba # kàxo karê	 I cleared it with a machete
ba # kàxo kukà	 I cut it with a machete
ba amã môp kaba I dug carà for you
ba amã môp kaba I dug carà to you
ba amã jàt kaba I dug yams for you
ba amã jàt kaba I dug yams to you
ba amã kwỳr kaba		I dug manioc for you
ba amã kwỳr kaba		I dug manioc to you
ba amã tyrti kaba	 I dug bananas for you
ba amã tyrti kaba	 I dug bananas to you
ba amã krãtỳx ngre kaba I dug the turtle eggs for you
ba amã krãtỳx ngre kaba I dug the turtle eggs to you
ba amã kà kaba	I dug the animal for you
ba amã kà kaba	I dug the animal to you
ba amã karõ kaba		I dug the photograph for you
ba amã karõ kaba		I dug the photograph to you
ba amã tyrti kaba	 I dug bananas for you
ba amã tyrti kaba	 I dug bananas to you
Ba amĩm môp kaba	 I dug cará for myself
Ba Kôkôtimã môp kaba		I dug cará for Kôkôti
ba kum môp kaba I dug cará for him
Ba kum môp kaba I dug cará for her
Ba me kum môp kaba	I dug cará for them
Ba mekmã môp kaba	 I dug cará for them
Ba ar imã môp kaba	I dug cará for us
Ba ar amã môp kaba	I dug cará for you
Ba Kôkôtimã môp kaba		I dig cará for Kôkôti
Ba kum môp kaba		I dig cará for him
Ba kum môp kaba		I dig cará for her
Ba ar imã môp kaba		I dig cará for us
ga Kôkôtimã môp kaba		You dig cará for Kôkôti
ga kum môp kaba		You dig cará for him
ga kum môp kaba		You dig cará for her
ga ar imã môp kaba		You dig cará for us
me Kôkôtimã môp kaba		They dig cará for Kôkôti
me kum môp kaba		They dig cará for him
me kum môp kaba		They dig cará for her
me ar imã môp kaba		They dig cará for us
gu me Kôkôtimã môp kaba		we dig cará for Kôkôti
ba me Kôkôtimã môp kaba		we dig cará for Kôkôti
gar Kôkôtimã môp kaba		You dig cará for Kôkôti
ba Kôkôtimã môp tu		I carried cará for Kôkôti
ba Kôkôtimã môp ga		I cooked cará for Kôkôti
ba Kôkôtimã môp kre		I planted cará for Kôkôti
ba Kôkôtimã môp kaba		I dig cará for Kôkôti
Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ bayo akĩ		Birbir stole your corn from you
Birbir abê anhõ karinhôo akĩ		Birbir stole your tobacco from you
Birbir abê anhõ kubẽkào akĩ		Birbir stole your clothing from you
Birbir abê anhõ katõko akĩ		Birbir stole your rifle from you
Birbir abê anhõ angào akĩ		Birbir stole your necklace from you
Birbir ibê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole my meat from me
Birbir kutê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole my meat from me
Birbir Kôkôtibê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole his meat from him
Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole Kôkôti's meat from him
Birbir abê anhõ mryo akĩ		Birbir stole your meat from you
Birbir bẽnjadjwỳrbê anhõ mryo akĩ		the chief's meat from him.
ba abê anhõ mryo akĩ		I stole your meat from you
me'õ abê anhõ mryo akĩ		someone stole your meat from you
me abê anhõ mryo akĩ		they stole your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ mryo abdju		Birbir hid your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ mryo tẽ		Birbir took your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ mryo ajkẽn		Birbir ruined your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ mry krẽ		Birbir ate your meat from you
Birbir abê anhõ mry by		Birbir took your meat in his hand from you
Birbir abê anhõ katõk kwỳr		Birbir broke your rifle from you
Birbir abê anhõ kubẽkà kadjô		Birbir ripped your cloth/clothes from you
Ba abê ngõr I fell asleep against you
Ba abê ngõr I fell asleep from you
Ba Birbirbê ngõr		I fell asleep against Birbir
Ba kubê ngõr		I fell asleep against him
Ba abãmbê ngõr	I fell asleep against your father
Ba anãbê ngõr	 I fell asleep against your mother
Ba mebê ngõr		I fell asleep against them
Birbir ibê ngõr Birbir fell asleep against me
# ibê ngõr	he fell asleep against me
ga ibê ngõr You fell asleep against me
me ibê ngõr they fell asleep against me
Bàkam me'õ ne kangã bĩ	Someone killed the snake in the forest
Kikrekam me'õ ne kangã bĩ	Someone killed the snake in the house
Krĩbê me'õ ne kangã bĩ	Someone killed the snake in the village
Ngàbê me'õ ne kangã bĩ	Someone killed the snake in the men's house
Prykam me'õ ne kangã bĩ	Someone killed the snake in the trail
Tãm ne # kanê o amykry	He was sick all day
Tãm ne # àpênh o amykry	He worked all day
Tãm ne # bixjaêr o amykry	He played all day
Tãm ne # õt o akati He slept all night
Tãm ne # tor o akati		He danced all night
Tãm ne # kanê o akati	He was sick all night
Birbir mũm prõt Birbir ran far
Birbir wãj prõt Birbir ran far
Inã ijã keket	 Mother laughed at me
Inã ajã keket	 Mother laughed at you
Inã 'ã keket	 Mother laughed at him
Inã me'ã keket	 Mother laughed at them
Inã bajã keket	 Mother laughed at us
Ne Birbir nõ mrõ		Birbir cooked the food
Ne # nõ mrõ		she cooked the food
Ne # nõ mrõ		he cooked the food
Ne anã nõ mrõ		your mother cooked the food
Ne ba nõ mrõ		I cooked the food
Ne gar nõ mrõ		you cooked the food
Ne ne nõ mrõ		they cooked the food
Birbir nã ro'ã ne àpênh Birbir works together with her mother
Birbir kanikwỳj ne àpênh		Birbir works together with her sister
Birbir kra ne àpênh Birbir works together with her child
Birbir me ne àpênh	Birbir works together with them
Ba akôt tẽ	I go with you
Ba Kôkôtikot tẽ	I go with Kôkôti
Ba bẽnjadjwỳrkôt tẽ	I go the chief
Ba inãkôt tẽ	I go with my mother
Ba mekôt tẽ	I go with them
Kôkôti ar ro'ã ngôjmã tẽ		Kôkôti went to the water with him
Kôkôti ar ro'ã bàkam tẽ		Kôkôti went to the forest with him
Kôkôti ar ro'ã kikremã tẽ		Kôkôti went to the house with him
Kôkôti ar ro'ã purmã tẽ		Kôkôti went to the field with him
Kôkôti ar ro'ã màtkà'ỳr tẽ		Kôkôti went to the airplane with him
Ikrãkam tokry	 My head hurts
Itikkam tokry	 My stomach hurts
Ikôkam tokry	 My back hurts
Ipar miôpmiôp	 My foot itches
Ipa miôpmiôp	 My arm itches
Arỳm ne kôk pi'ôko ajngrà	 The wind scattered the papers
Arỳm ne kôk kadjàto ajngrà	 The wind scattered the cotton
Arỳm ne kôk kubẽkào ajngrà	 The wind scattered the clothes
Arỳm ne kôk pi'ôo ajngrà	 The wind scattered the leaves
Djudjê ne pãnh 20	 The bow is worth cr 20,00
Kruw ne pãnh 20	 The arrow is worth cr 20,00
Kop ne pãnh 20	 The war club is worth cr 20,00
Kàx ne pãnh 20	 The machete is worth cr 20,00
Kubẽkà ne pãnh 20	 The clothing is worth cr 20,00
pãnh		trade
Nãm # Kôkôtimã êx	 He lied to Kôkôti
Nãm # imã êx	 He lied to me
Nãm # nãmã êx	 He lied to his mother
Nãm # bãmmã êx	 He lied to his father
Nãm # bẽnjadjwỳrmã êx	 He lied to the chief
nãm indeed
Arỳm nẽ ba # mry 'ã ku'uw	 I asked him for meat
Arỳm nẽ ba # bày 'ã ku'uw	 I asked him for corn
Arỳm nẽ ba # ngô 'ã ku'uw	 I asked him for water
Arỳm nẽ ba # tyrti 'ã ku'uw	 I asked him for bananas
Arỳm nẽ ba # tep 'ã ku'uw	 I asked him for fish
arỳm		already
Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh	Kôkôti knows how to read
Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh	Kôkôti knows how to write
Kôkôti kute kupip ka'ur pumũnh	Kôkôti knows how to write
Kôkôti kute djudjê nhipêx pumũnh	Kôkôti knows how to make a bow
Kôkôti kute pry pumũnh	Kôkôti knows how to the path
pumũnh	to see
pumũnh	to know
Imã jàt prãm		I want yams
Imã motkiteru prãm		I want a mosquito ne
Imã mry prãm		I want meat
Imã tyrti prãm		I want bananas
Imã jàt prãm		I want yams
Imã bày prãm		I want corn
Imã bày gogo prãm		I want rice
Kôkôti ne me ngrer ma	 Kôkôti heard the singing
Kôkôti ne # kabẽn ma	 Kôkôti heard the talk
Kôkôti ne me karõ ma	 Kôkôti heard the spirits
Kôkôti ne # kubyt ma	 Kôkôti heard the howler monkey
Kôkôti ne me àkjêr ma	 Kôkôti heard the yelling
Kẽn ne ja	 This is a stone
Pur ne ja	 This is a field
Pry ne ja	 This is a path
Tônti ne ja	 This is an armadillo
Pidjỳ ne ja	 This is medicine
Tep ne ja	 This is a fish
Ba ne ba êdjào kamrêk	 I made the string red
Ba ne ba # ipu	 I filled it
Ba ne ba # kaprỳ	 I emptied it
Ijajne	I'm full
Ikangro	I'm hot
Ikaprĩ	I'm sad
Ingryk	I'm angry
Imex		I'm well
Irerek	I'm weak
Itỳx		I'm strong
Ikatyk	I'm tired
Ikatyk mex	I'm exhausted
Idjom	 I'm exhausted
Imã prãm		I'm hungry
Imã kry		I'm cold
Imã kôr		I'm thirsty
Imã kĩnh		I'm happy
Imã djukanga		I'm lazy
Ibê Birbir	I am	Birbir
Kubê Kôkôti He is Kôkôti
Kubê bẽnjadjwỳr He is the chief
Kubê mengrer djwỳnh He is the festival leader
Kubê kukôj	He is the monkey
Purkam jàt	There are yams in the field
Bàkam ngiadjy	There are deer in the forest
Ngôkam tep	There are fish in the water
Pĩkam pidjô There is fruit in the tree
Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro mõ	The food is getting hot
Arỳm ne bày ngrà mõ The corn corn is drying
Arỳm ne # kamrêk mõ It is getting (almost) red
Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro The food is hot
Arỳm ne bày ngrà		The corn is dry
Arỳm ne # kamrêk		It is red
Arỳm ne # ipu	 It is full
Arỳm ne # kaprỳ It is empty
Arỳm ne na rwyk tỳx It is raining hard
Arỳm ne kôk jabêr tỳx	 It is very windy
Arỳm ne kàjkwa rax	It is clear
Arỳm ne kàjkwa punu-re	It is cloudy
Arỳm ne aringro tỳx	It is sunny
Arỳm ne akati #	It is day
Arỳm ne akamàt #	It is night
Johnny djãm ga?	 Johnny, is that you?
Nà, ba	Yes, it's me (for a man)
Mỳjrỳ ga tẽ?		Where are you going?
Ngô'ỳrỳne ba tẽ I'm going to the river
Aj. 'Ỳr tẽ	Then go (for a man)
Ã, ba	 Yes, it's me (for a woman)
Anũ. 'Ỳr tẽ Then go (for a woman)
nà	yes (man talking)
ã	 yes (woman talking)
ãã	yes (woman talking)
aj	yes! (informal, man talking)
anũ	yes! (informal, woman talking)
mỳjrỳ	 where?
ngô water
ngô river
tẽ	to go
Ngô 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the river
Bà 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the forest
Krĩrax 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the town
Krĩrax 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the city
Ngà 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the men's house
Kikre 'ỳrỳne ba tẽ		I'm going to the house
Jãm ne ga tẽ?	 Where are you going?
Purmã ne ba tẽ	I'm going to the country
Aj mã	 Then go (man talking)
Anũ mã	 Then go (woman talking)
Jãm?		where?
Pur mã ne ba tẽ I'm going to the country
Krĩ mã ne ba tẽ I'm going to the village
Berẽ mã ne ba tẽ		I'm going to Belem
Ngà mã ne ba tẽ I'm going to the men's house
Krĩrax mã ne ba tẽ I'm going to the town
Krĩrax mã ne ba tẽ	I'm going to the city
Inhũrkwã mã ne ba tẽ		I'm going to my house
Djãm ngô'ỳr ne ga tẽ?	 Are you going to the river?
Kati. Inhũrkwã'ỳr ne ba tẽ. No, I'm going to my house
Ba akôt tẽ	I'm going with you, ok?
Gu 'ỳr	Sure, let's go!
Arỳm ne ba itẽmmã	 I'm going now.
Anũ mã	Then go
akôt		with you
arỳm		now
arỳm		in this moment
ikôt		with me
itẽmmã	I'm going
kati		no
ar akôt tẽ	They are going with you
Kôkôti akôt tẽ	Kôkôti is going with you
Me akôt tẽ	They are going with you
Ba me kôt tẽ	 I'm going with everyone
Ba ar kôt tẽ	 I'm going with them
Ba kôt tẽ	 I'm going with him
Ba ar akôt tẽ	 I'm going with you
Ba inã kôt tẽ	 I'm going with my mother
Me bêngôkre kabẽn ne mexkumrẽx	Kayapo is a beautiful language
Ije akabẽn mar prãmã		I want to learn to speak your language
Gop imã me akabẽn katàt jarẽ, nẽn?	Whenever I make a mistake, correct me, alright?
Ije mar ngrire rã'ã So far, I only understand a little bit!
gop expression
ije I
jarẽ		to say
kabẽn	 to talk
katàt	 the correct way to talk
mar to understand
mexkumrẽx	 very good!
nẽn it's correct!
ngrire	a little
ngrire	a few
rã'ã		still
Ajte akatibê, nẽn?	let's study again tomorrow, ok?
Ajte arẽ		repeat
Ajte ja jarẽ		repeat that
Ajte kunĩ jarẽ	repeat the whole phrase
Arỳmne ba kuma	now I understand
Gu badjàpênh o nhỹ	let's start to work
Ije mar kêt rã'ã	I still don't understand
Imã ja jarẽ tell this to me
Imã ja kunĩ jarẽ		tell me the whole thing
Johnny, arỳm ne ba awỳr bôx.		Johnny, I arrived
Djãm ga?		Is it you?
Ãã, bakêt	 It's really me!
Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?		do you like bananas?
Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh. Yes, I do.
Mĩ, 'õ by	 Get some
Tyrtija ne ànhkumrẽx.	Imã ành. These bananas are delicious! I love them!
Arỳmne ba itẽmmã.	 I'm already leaving
bôx to arrive
bôx to come
ja	this
kêt really
kêt trully
kumrẽx	really
mĩ	take it
tyrti	 banana
Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?		Do you like banana?
Djãm amã môp kĩnh?		Do you like cara?
Djãm amã jàt kĩnh?		Do you like sweet potato?
Djãm amã mry kĩnh?		Do you like meat?
Djãm amã djwỳ kĩnh?		Do you like beiju?
Djãm amã bày kĩnh?		Do you like corn?
Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh	Yes, I like banana
Ãã, imã môp kĩnh	Yes, I like cara
Ãã, imã jàt kĩnh	Yes, I like sweet potato.
Ãã, imã mry kĩnh	Yes, I like meat.
Ãã, imã djwỳ kĩnh	Yes, I like beiju.
Ãã, imã bày kĩnh	Yes, I like corn.
Djãm amã prãm?	Are you hungry?
Ãã, imã prãm		Yes, I am
Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?		Do you like banana?
Djãm amã tyrti kĩnh?		Do you accept banana?
Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh		Yes, I like
Ãã, imã tyrti kĩnh		Yes, I accept
Mĩ, 'õ by	 Get some
Imã tyrti prãm	I want bananas
Imã bày prãm	I want corn
Imã jàt prãm	I want sweet potato
Imã tyrti kĩnh	I like banana
Imã bày kĩnh	I like corn
Imã jàt kĩnh	I like sweet potato
Imã tyrti djành	I really like banana
Imã bày djành	I really like corn
Imã jàt djành	I really like sweet potato
kry to feel cold
kôr to be thirsty
Djãm amexkumrẽx?		Are you felling alright?
Kati. Ikanê.		No, I'm sick.
Mỳj ne ajã? What are you felling?
Ikrãkam tokry	 I have a terrible headache
Djãm arỳm ne ga anhõ pidjỳ krẽ? Did you take some medicine?
Nà, ajbir ne ba inhõ pidjỳ krẽ. Birãm tebê imex jabey	 Yes, I already took it. Maybe, I'll get better.
ajbir	 right now
ajte		another time
ajte		again
birãm	 maybe
imexkumrẽx	I'm well
imexkumrẽx	I'm fine
imexkumrẽx	I'm healthy
inhõ		my
tebê		quickly
tokry	 to feel pain
Imex		I'm ok
Imex		I'm fine
Ingryk	I'm angry
Ikaprĩre		I'm sad
Irerekre		I'm weak
Ikatyk	I'm tired
Ikanê	 I'm sick
Itỳx		I'm strong
Itỳx		I'm healty
Ipunu	 I'm bad
Ipunu	 I'm not well
Amex		You're ok
Amex		You're fine
Angryk	You're angry
Akaprĩre		You're sad
Arerekre		You're weak
Akatyk	You're tired
Akanê	 You're sick
Atỳx		You're strong
Apunu	 You're bad
Apunu	 You're not well
Djãm amexkumrẽx?		Are you ok?
Djãm angryk?		Are you angry?
Djãm akaprĩre?		Are you sad?
Djãm arerekre?		Are you sad?
Djãm akatyk?		Are you weak?
Djãm akanê?		Are you sick?
Djãm amexkumrẽx?		Are you ok?
Kati. Ikĩnh No, I'm happy
Mỳj ne ga o nhỹ?		What are you doing?
Pi'y ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ. I'm pounding nuts
Pi'y ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ. I'm crushing nuts
Mỳj ne akra krẽn o nhỹ? What are your son eating?
Jàt ne ikra krẽn o nhỹ	He is eating sweet potato
Djãm amã jàt kĩnh?	Do you want sweet potato?
Kati. Ajbir ne ba inhõ kwỳ krẽ. No, I just eat
Arỳm ne ba ijajne	 I'm satisfied
Kwỳr ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm pounding cassava
Kwỳr ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm crushing cassava
Bày ne ne ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm pounding corn
Bày ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm crushing corn
Tyrti djô ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm pounding bananas
Tyrti djô ba ka'uk o nhỹ	I'm crushing bananas
Pi'y ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating nuts
Bày ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating corn
Tyrti ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating bananas
Djwỳ ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating beiju
Mry ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating meat
Tep ne ba krẽn o nhỹ	 I'm eating fish
Ba idjàpênh o nhỹ	 I'm working
Ba ingrer o nhỹ	 I'm singing
Ba imỳr o nhỹ	 I'm crying
Ba ikeket o nhỹ	 I'm laughing
Djã nã gãm anhõ kwỳ krẽn o nhỹ? Are you eating?
Djã nã gãm karibêr o nhỹ?	 Are you fanning the fire?
Djã nã gãm omũnh o nhỹ? Are you seeing?
Kati. Nã bãm idjápênh o nhỹ No, I'm working
Kati. Nã bãm pi'ôk no'ôk o nhỹ No, I'm writing
Kati. Nã bãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn o nhỹ No, I'm eating
Ba ikra pumũnh o nhỹ		I'm taking care of my son
Johnny, mỳjneja?		Johnny, what's that?
Tyrtineja	 It's a banana
Mỳj tyrtineja?	what kind of banana is this?
Tekàkamrêktineja		It's tekákamrêkti
Jàtneja It's sweet potato
Mỳj jàtneja?		What kind of sweet potato is this?
Jàt 'oktineja	 It's 'ôkti
Djãm mryneja?	 Is this meat?
Nà, mryneja Yes, it's meat
Djãm ngijãdjyneja?	Is it venison?
Kati. Angrôneja.		No, it's peccary meat.
angrô	 peccary
ngijãdjy		deer
'ôkti	 kind of sweet potato
tekàkamrêkti		kind of banana
Bày neja		It's corn
Pi'y neja		It's Brazil nut
Pur neja		It's a farm
Kikre neja		It's a house
Ngà neja		It's a men's house
Imô neja		It's a lake
Kawa newa	 It's a mortar and pestle
Kubẽkà newa	 It's a cloth
Kuwy newa	 It's a fire
Ki newa	 It's a clay oven
Djudjê newa	 It's a bow
Kruw newa	 It's an arrow
Katõk newa	 It's a shotgun
Pi'ôk newa	 It's a paper
Pi'ôk newa	 It's a book
Ngônh newa	 It's a metal container
Maria, nhãr abãm?	 Maria, where's your father?
Ngàbê ne nhỹ.	 He is on the men's house
Anãdjwỳ. Nhãr anã?	And where's your mother?
Inã ne me kôt purmã mõ	My mother went to the farm with the others.
Arỳm me bôx 'ỳr.		They'll come back soon.
Nhãr akamy? Where's your brother
Ikamy me prĩrekôt bixaêro ba		My brother is playing with the others kids
Nhãr akanikwỳnh?		Where's your sister?
Ikanikwỳnh ne kupipkam nhỹ	My sister is sitting on the mat.
bãm father
nã	mother
djwỳ		also
kanikwỳnh	 sister
kamy		brother
kupip	 sleeping mat
me prĩre		kids
Nhãr akra?	Where's your son?
Nhãr akra?	Where's your daughter?
Kikrekam ne dja He's at home
Kupipkam ne nhỹ He's sitting on the mat
Ngô'ỳr ne tẽ		He went to the river
Purmã ne tẽ He went to the farm
Pykabê ne nhỹ	 He's sitting on the ground
Krĩbê ne nhỹ		He's at home or in the village.
Nhãr djwỳ?	Where's beiju?
Nãr djwỳ?	Where's beiju?
Nhãr jàt?	Where's sweet potatoes?
Nhãr tyrti?	Where's bananas?
Nhãr pi'y?	Where's the nuts?
Nãr jàt?	Where's sweet potatoes?
Nãr tyrti?	Where's bananas?
Nãr pi'y?	Where's the nuts?
Ngônhkam ne djwỳ	 It's on pot
Pĩponh'ã ne nõ	 They're on the table
Kikrekam ne nõ	 They're inside the house
Wãnhne nõ	 They are there
nhiruwa mother (talking to)
nã	mother (talking about)
djũnwa father (talking to)
bãm	father (talking about)
àpnhire sister (talking to)
kanikwỳnh	sister (talking about)
akmẽre brother (talking to)
kamy	brother (talking about)
tujwa grandma (talking to)
kwatỳnh	grandma (talking about)
tujwa aunt (talking to)
kwatỳnh	aunt (talking about)
ngetwa grandpa (talking to)
inget	grandpa (talking about)
ngetwa aunt (talking to)
inget	aunt (talking about)
Maria, mỳj ne ga o dja? Maria, what are you doing?
Kupip ne ba 'yr o dja	I’m weaving a sleeping mat
Nhym akamydjwỳ. Djãm kupip ne 'yr o dja?		And your brother, is he also weaving a sleeping mat?
Kati. Kruw ne imrô o nhỹ		No, he's putting feathers on some arrows
Arỳm ne ba kuma.		Now, I understand!
Mỳj ne me prĩre o ba?	 What are the kids doing?
Me bixaêr o ba	They're playing.
imrô		to warp
kruw		arrow
kuma		to know
kuma		to understand
o dja	 to do
o dja	 to make
'yr to weave
Nã bãm 'yr o dja		I'm weaving
Nã gãm 'yr o dja		You're weaving
Nãm ar 'yr o dja		They're weaving
Nãm me 'yr o dja		everyone's weaving
Nã bãm põnh o dja.		I'm washing
Nã gãm põnh o dja.		You're washing
Nâm ar põnh o dja.		They're washing
Nâm ar põnh o dja.		Everyone's washing
Nã bãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn o dja	I'm eating
Nã gãm inhõ kwỳ krẽn o dja	You're eating
Nâm ar inhõ kwỳ krẽn o dja	They're eating
Nãm me inhõ kwỳ krẽn o dja	Everyone's eating
Kikrene ba kapõnh o dja.		I'm sweeping the house
Ba itor o iba.	I'm dancing
Ga tor o aba.	You're dancing
Ar tor o ba.	They're dancing
Me tor o ba.	Everyone's dancing
Ba itor ar o iba.	 I'm dancing
Ba ibixaêr ar o iba.	 I'm playing
Ba ron krã ar o iba.	 I'm playing ron krã
Ba bora japĩn ar o iba.	 I'm playing soccer
Ba karêr ar o iba.	 I'm digging with a hoe
Ar tor ar o ba.	 They're (few) dancing
Ar bixaêr ar o ba.	 They're (few) playing
Ar ron krã ar o ba.	 They're (few) playing ron krã
Ar bora japĩn ar o ba.	 They're (few) playing soccer
Ar karêr ar o iba.	 They're (few) digging with a hoe
Mỳj ne ar *ar o ba? What are they (few) doing?
Àmnire	Sister
Mỳ? What?
Arỳm ne ba awỳr bôx I arrived
Nhym nã?		Who is you?
Ba	It's me
Djãm ga?		Is it you?
Ãã, ba	Yes, it's me
Ajbir ne ba purkurũm bôx		I just arrived from the farm
Djãm amã bày kĩnh?	 Do you like corn?
Ãã, imã kĩnhĩ	 I like it too much
Mĩ. Amim 'õ by	Get some for you
Mrãmri. Mexkumrẽx.	It's very good.
amim		for myself
kurũm	 from
kurũm	 of
Ikamy ne bôx.	My brother arrived.
Bẽnjadjwỳr ne bôx.	The boss arrived.
Kubẽ ne bôx.	The foreigner arrived.
Ikamy ne bôx.	My brother arrived.
Ibãm ne bôx.	My father arrived.
Nhym ne bôx?		Who arrived?
Mỳj me'õ ne bôx?		Who arrived?
Mỳj me'õ ne tỹm?		Who fell?
Mỳj me'õ ne tyk?		Who died?
Mỳj me'õ ne muw?		Who's crying?
Mỳj me'õ ne kabẽn ne?		Who's talking?
Mỳj me'õ ne nhỹ?		Who's sitting?
Djãm arỳm ne ga djuw?	 Have you already taken bath?
Ãã ajbir ne ba djuw.		Yes, I finished it just now
Ba te akôt itẽmmã	 I almost went with you, but it didn't work out.
Gadjwỳ. Djãm arỳm ne ga djuw?	 And you? Have you been there?
Idjwỳr ket rã'ã.		Not yet.
Gu on djuw. Let's go now.
Ãã, gu on. Idjwỳr prãm. Aringro tỳ:xi.	Sure! Let's go. I really want to go! It's so hot!
djwỳ		too
djwỳr	 to take a bath
djuw		to take a bath
on	to start an action
on	to go
te	in vain
te	unsuccessful
Itẽm kêt		I didn't go
Itor kêt		I didn't dance
Inõr kêt		I didn't lie down
Idjwỳr kêt		I didn't take bath
Irwỳk kêt		I didn't go down
Imỳr kêt		I didn't cry
Inhõt kêt		I didn't sleep
Ba tẽ	 I went
Ba to	 I danced
Ba nõ	 I lay down
Ba djuw	 I took bath
Ba ruw	 I went down
Ba muw	 I cried
Ba ngõr	 I slept
Djãm arỳm ne ga tẽ? Did you go?
Djãm arỳm ne ga to? Did you dance?
Djãm arỳm ne ga nõ? Did you lie down?
Djãm arỳm ne ga djuw?	 Did you take bath?
Djãm arỳm ne ga ruw?		Did you go down?
Djãm arỳm ne ga muw?		Did you cry?
Djãm arỳm ne ga ngõr?	 Did you sleep?
Itẽm kêt		I didn't go yet
Itor kêt		I didn't dance yet
Inõr kêt		I didn't lie down
Idjwỳr kêt		I didn't take bath
Irwỳk kêt		I didn't go down
Imỳr kêt		I didn't cry
Inhõt kêt		I didn't sleep
Djãm arỳm ne ga tẽ? Did you go?
Djãm arỳm ne ga to? Did you danced?
Djãm arỳm ne ga nõ? Did you lie down?
Djãm arỳm ne ga djuw? Did you take bath?
Djãm arỳm ne ga ruw? Did you go down?
Djãm arỳm ne ga muw? Did you cry?
Djãm arỳm ne ga ngõr? Did you sleep?
Purmã ne ba tẽ	I went to the farm
Purmã ne ga tẽ	You went to the farm
Purmã ne gu tẽ	We (me and we) went to the farm
Purmã ne tẽ	He went to the farm
Purmã ne tẽ She went to the farm
Purmã ne ba itẽm kêt		I didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne ga atẽm kêt		You didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne gu batẽm kêt		We (me and you) didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne ba tẽm		He didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne ba tẽm		She didn't go to the farm
Itẽm kêt	 I didn't go
Itẽm bit	 I just went
Itẽm kumrẽx	 I went and I'm not coming back anymore
Itor kêt	 I didn't dance
Itor bit	 I just dance
Itor kumre:x	 I danced for a long time
Itor mex	 I danced well
Inõr kêt	 I didn't lie down
Inõr bit	 I just lie down
Idjwyr kêt	 I didn't take bath
Idjwyr mex	 I took a very good bath
Idjwyr kume:x	 I took bath for a long time
Irwỳk kêt	I didn't go down
Irwỳk bit	I just go down
Imỳr kêt		I didn't cry
Imỳr bit		I just cry
Imỳr kume:x		I cried a lot
Inhõt kêt		I didn't sleep
Inhõt bit		I just sleep
Inhõt mex		I slept well
Itẽm
Itẽm kêtkumrẽx	Actually, I didn't go
Djãm itẽm kêtgot!	 Didn't I go?
Krĩ'ỳr ne ba tẽ I went to the village
Mum krĩ'ỳr ne ba tẽ	 I went to the village, far away
Onij krĩrax'ỳr ne ba tẽ.	 I went to the village, very far from here
Kikre'ỳr ne ba to	 I danced in the direction of the house
Mum kikre'ỳr ne ba to	 I danced in the direction of the house, far away
Onij kikre rax'ỳr ne ba to	I danced in the direction of the house, very far from here
Tebê ne ba djuw		I took a shower quickly
Ngo màtkam ne ba djuw	 I bathed in the stream.
Ba ruw	I went down
Tebê ne ba ruw	I went down very quickly
Ngo màtkam ne ba ruw		I went down in the river
Ibôx kêt.	I didn't arrive
Inox kêt.	I didn't sink
Itỹm kêt.	I didn't fall
Ba bôx.		I arrived
Ba nox.		I sank
Ba tỹm.		I fell
Djãm arỳm ne ga bôx?	 Did you arrive?
Djãm arỳm ne ga nox?	 Did you sink?
Djãm arỳm ne ga tỹm?	 Did you fall?
Kati. Ibôx kêt rã'ã No, I didn't arrive yet
Kati. Inox kêt rã'ã No, I didn't sink yet
Kati. Itỹm kêt rã'ã No, I didn't fall yet
Djãm arỳm ne ga bôx?	 Did you arrive?
Djãm arỳm ne ga nox?	 Did you sink?
Djãm arỳm ne ga tỹm?	 Did you fall?
Aã, arỳrm ne ba bôx yes, I already arrived
Aã, arỳrm ne ba nox yes, I already sank
Aã, arỳrm ne ba tým yes, I already fell
Purmã ne bar mõ We (a small group) went to the farm
Purmã ne gar mõ You all (a small group) went to the farm
Purmã ne gwaj mõ		We (me and you) went to the farm
Purmã ne ar mõ	They (a small group) went to the farm
Purmã ne ar imõr kêt		We (a small group, except you) didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne ar amõr kêt		You all (a small group) didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne gwaj bamõr kêt		We (a small group, including you and me) didn't go to the farm
Purmã ne ar mõr kêt		They (a small group) didn't go to the farm
Ngy'ã ne ga tỹm You fell in the mud
Ngô myrri ne ga tỹm.		You fell by the riverbank
Akamàtkam ne ikra àn		Yesterday, my baby hurt me
Ne kam akamàt ngrirekam, na krakkam ne ruw	As soon as it got dark, while it was raining heavily, my baby was born
Ikra ni ne ruw	The baby was a girl
Ikramẽ iprõ ne mexkumrẽx		The baby and my wife are doing well
Me bengôkre djukane'ỳr ne ba tẽ I’ve already gotten tribal medicine for them
akamàt	at mohjy
akamàt ngrire	 at dusk
àn	to feel labor pains
kra baby
kra son
kra daughter
krar		the sound of something breaking
krak		the sound of something breaking
na	raining
ni	female
ukane	 tribal medicine
Idjujarẽnh kêt	I didn't tell everything about this
Idjàptõr kêt	I didn't spit
Idjũmjanh kêt	I didn't chew it
Ba ajarẽ		I told everything about this
Ba apto		I spat
Ba ũmja		I chewed it
Djã ne ga ajarẽ?		Did you tell everything about this?
Djã ne ga aptô?		Did you spit?
Djã ne ga ũmja?		Did you chew iy?
Ãã. Ba ajarẽ.	 Yes, I told everything about it
Ãã. Ba aptô.	 Yes, I spat
Ãã. Ba ũmja.	 Yes, I chewed it
Purmã ne ba me mõ.	We all went to work in the fields
Purmã ne ba me mõ.	We (a big group) went to work in the fields
Purmã ne ga me mõ.	You all went to work in the fields
Purmã ne ga me mõ.	You (a big group) went to work in the fields
Purmã ne gu me mõ.	We (me and you) and everyone else went to work in the fields
Purmã ne me mõ.	They all went to work in the fields
Purmã ne me mõ.	They (a big group) went to work in the fields
Purmã ne me imôr kêt.	We all (except you) didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me imôr kêt.	We (a big group except you) didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me amõr kêt.	You all didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me amõr kêt.	You (a big group) didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me bamõr kêt.	We (you and me) didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me mõr kêt.	They all didn't go to work in the fields
Purmã ne me mõr kêt.	They (a big group) didn't go to work in the fields
Djãm Kôkôtine àptorgot!	 Did Kôkôti spit! (He didn't!)
Iba kêt I'm not going (repeatedly)
Iku'ê*	I'm not getting up (repeatedly)
Ipròt	 I'm not running
Ikukwỳr I'm not crawling
Ikator	I'm not leaving
Ikrĩn	 I'm not sitting (repeatedly)
Inhikwãnh	 I'm not laying down (repeatedly)
Ba iba	I'm going (repeatedly)
Ba iku'ê	I'm getting up (repeatedly)
Ba iprõt	 I'm running
Ba ikukwỳr I'm crawling
Ba ikato	I'm leaving
Ba ikrĩn	 I'm sitting (repeatedly)
Ba inhikwã	 I'm laying down (repeatedly)
Bar purmã te.	 We (someone and me) went to the farm
Gar purmã te.	 You (and some others) went to the farm
Gwaj purmã te.	 We (me and you) and other(s) went to the farm
Kryràm ne ba tẽ I went early
Ba kam iprõmẽ ar kam idjàpênh	 So, my wife and me work in the fields
Kwỳ, ba kam pa jakàn o mrãn akà'ã kurẽ	After burning the field, I cut the branches and threw them along its edges
Prĩne djwỳmã karên kam kam kre	I completely cleared the field to plant in it, and then I planted it
Môpmẽ tyrtimẽ katẽbàrmẽ katẽmẽ. Kadjwatimẽ bàymẽ kadjàtmẽ karinhômẽ katẽtàmkurmẽ kre.	 I planted cara, bananas, papaya, sugar cane, corn, tobacco and watermelon
Arỳm kam kre pa nhym arỳm ingrõt		I have already finished planting and the seeds germinated
Arỳm ingrõn abatành ne	They germinated and are growing
akà'ã	 in the borders of
akàr		to cut off completely
akà		to cut off completely
àpênh	 to work
àpê to work
iprõ		my wife
rẽnh		to play
kurẽ		to play
Ije kakôr kêt	 I didn't play an instrument
Ije kakrẽnh kêt	 I didn't scratch it
Ije kapõnh kêt	 I didn't sweep
Ije kapõnh kêt	 I didn't weed it
Ije karêr kêt	 I didn't scream
Ije kudjônh kêt	 I didn't peel it
Ba kakô	 I played an instrument
Ba kakrê	 I scratched it
Ba kapõ	 I swept it
Ba karê	 I weeded it
Ba kà	 I screamed
Ba kudjô	 I peeled it
Ije kapõnh kêt rã'ã.		I didn't sweep yet
Aje kapõnh kêt rã'ã.		You didn't sweep yet
Gu baje kapõnh kêt rã'ã.		We (you and me) didn't sweep yet
Kute kapõnh kêt rã'ã.		He didn't sweep yet
Kute kapõnh kêt rã'ã.		She didn't sweep yet
Ije karêr 'ỳr	 I'm ready to weed it now
Ije karêr mex	 I weeded it well
Ije karêr mã		I'm going to do some weeding
Ije pur karêr kêt	 I didn't weed with a machete
Ije kàxo karêr kêt	I didn’t weed the field with a machete
Ije kikre bu'ã karêr kêt		I didn't weed around the house
Ba kàxo	karê	 I weeded with a machete
Ba kàxo pur karê.	 I weeded the field with a machete
Ba kikre bu'ã karê	I weeded around the house
Ije kaki kêt.	 I didn't try the food
Ije kre kêt.	 I didn't plant it
Ije kanga kêt.	 I didn't abandon him
Ije kane kêt.	 I didn't treat the disease
Ije 'ôk kêt.	 I didn't paint the body
Ije kaprêprêk kêt.	 I didn't knock
Ba kaki.	 I tried the food
Ba kre.	 I planted it
Ba kanga.	 I abandoned him
Ba kane.	 I treated the disease
Ba 'ôk.	 I painted the body
Ba kaprêprêk.	 I knocked
Mỳkam ne ga kaki?	 Why did you try the food?
Mỳkam ne ga kre?	 Why did you plant it?
Mỳkam ne ga kanga?	 Why did you abandon him?
Mỳkam ne ga kanga?	 Why did you abandon her?
Mỳkam ne ga kane?	 Why did you try the treated the disease?
Mỳkam ne ga 'ôk?	 Why did you painted the body?
Mỳkam ne ga kaprêprêk?	 Why did you knock?
Aje kane 'ỳr		You're almost treating the disease
Aje kane mex		You treated well the disease
Aje kane mã		You pretend to treat the disease.
Aje ikaprêprêk kêt	You didn't hurt me
Ije akaprêprêk kêt	I didn't hurt you
Ba ajôk		I painted you
Ba prĩne ajôk	 I painted you carefully
Me kunĩ ne me imã pur dji	 Everyone help me clean the field
Amex totokbê ne me my pur'ỳr mrãn par prã	 At the beginning of the drought, the men go to the new fields and brush the bushes
Ne kam kam kukà Then, they cut the trees
Nhym kam nõn kam ngrà ba me kam kum angij	 They leave them there until they are completely dry, and then they burn them
Nhym kam kwỳn.	The fields are burned.
Nã bãm me kum angij We’ve already set fire to them.
Ne kam ajte karên krax rê.	Then, we brush them again and remove the small stumps
Kwỳ totokbê ne ba me amĩm djwỳmã karê	 Soon after we burned the field, we weed'in preparation for planting
Ne arỳm kam djwỳ kre		So far, we’ve already planted everything
amex		summer
amex		dry season
djwỳ		farm products
kum angij	 set fire to
angjênh set fire to
me kunĩ everyone
par prã to weed the undergrowth beneath the trees
Ije mry jabej kêt	 I didn't look for meat
Ije mry janhĩ kêt	 I didn’t remove the meat (with a tool)
Ije ikra nhigo kêt	 I didn't whisper for my son
Ije ikra jajtẽk kêt	 I didn't paint my son's cheeks
Ije kruw nhimrô kêt	 I didn’t fletch the arrow.
Ije kikre nhipêx kêt	 I don't do the house
Ije abej kêt	 I didn't look for it
Ije anhĩ kêt	 I didn’t remove it (with a tool)
Ije igo kêt	 I didn't whisper for him
Ije igo kêt	 I didn't whisper for her
Ije ajtẽk kêt	 I didn't paint it
Ije imrô kêt	 I fletched it
Ije ipêx kêt	 I do it
Kute abej kêt	 He didn't look for it
Kute abej 'ỳr	 He's almost looking for it
Kute abej mã	 He's going to look for it
Ije amã imrô kêt		I didn't fletch it for you
Ije ngônhkam mry janhĩ kêt	I didn’t take the meat out of the bowl
Ije amã bàkam mry jabej kêt I didn't look for the meat in the woods for you
Ije pĩ jakàr kêt		I didn't cut the firewood
Ije pĩ jamỳnh kêt		I didn't look for the firewood
Ije pĩ janhôr kêt		I didn't hang the firewood
Ije akàr kêt		I didn't cut it
Ije amỳnh kêt		I didn't look for it
Ije anhôr kêt		I didn't hang it
Ba pĩ jakà	I cut the firewood
Ba pĩ jamỳ	I looked for the firewood
Ba pĩ janhô	I hung the firewood
Ba akà	 I cut it
Ba 'amỳ I looked for it
Ba anhô I hung it
Ije ajaêr kêt.	I didn't scary you
Ije ajarẽnh kêt.	I didn't talk about you
Ije ajanor kêt.	I didn't order you
Ije aêr kêt I didn't scary him
Ije aêr kêt I didn't scary her
Ije arẽnh kêt	 I didn't talk about it
Ije anor kêt		I didn't order this
Ba ajaê.		I scaried you
Ba ajarẽ.		I talked about you
Ba ajano.		I ordered you
Ba aê.		I scaried he
Ba aê.		I scaried her
Ba arẽ		I talked about this
Ba ano.		I ordered this
Bàkam ne ba tẽ	I went to the woods
Ba ngôja'ã rẽn tẽn ane nhym kukryt mõ.	I crossed the river and left, and a tapir passed by me
Ba kam amĩm		I said with me
Je, ba kukrytja mãn bĩ, ane yay, I'll kill that tapir
Ne kam ate kôt ropreo tẽ		So I follow her with my dog
Ropreo tẽ:n ane nhym pidjôja'ỳr bôx I took my dog and left, and the tapir got close of the fruitful tree
Ne kam ar kwỳ kur o ba	she stayed there eating the fruit
Nhym ropreja kubã ba kam kôt wabi	 The dog sniffed her (and follow her) and I went up after her
Ropreja mã kubãno tẽ		the dog left and follow her
Arỳm o dja	he harassed the tapir
Ba kam'ỳr iprõt ne		I ran
Ba kam kubĩ I killed her
ate unexpectedly
ate at that moment
pidjô	 fruit
ropre	 dog
Ije bãr kêt.		I didn't smell it
Ije par kêt.		I didn't kill
Ije bĩn kêt.		I didn't kill
Ba kubã.		I smelled it
Ba kupa.		I killed
Ba kubĩ.		I killed
Ije mry bãr kêt.		I didn't hear the animals' sound
Ije mry bã kêt.		I heared the animals' sound
Ije angrôwa par kêt I didn't kill those peccaries
Ije ropre	pytàr kêt.	 I didn't save the dog
Ije 'utàr kêt	I didn't save it
Ar kikrekadjy bô'ỳr tẽ	They are going to get thatch
Ar imôkam tẽ		They're going to the lake (far away)
Rikre kabio tẽ:n arỳm kabi pa.	They're going to choose thatch and finish with it
Ne kam ate kum kàro tẽ. Soon after, they cut the bundles of thatch
Kum kàro tẽ:n kam arỳm kum kàr pa	 They keep going until they cut all of them
Ne kam ar ate kapôtmã o apôxo ba:n arỳmo bôx		Walking one behind the other, they carry the thatch to the clearing
Ne ate kadjy kabôo dja. Then, they all open the thatch leaves.
Bô kabô pan ate kà'ỳro ba, ne kàkam kumẽ.	 When they finish, they carry the thatch to the river, load it into the canoe, and pile it up inside
kadjy	 for the purpose of
kapôt	 clearing
kum for him
kum for her
kum for it
Kryràm ne ba ngijãdjy o tẽ	I brought the deer early
Kryràm ne ba o tẽ	I brought him early
Kryràm ne ba o tẽ	I brought her early
Kryràm ne ba o tẽ	I brought it early
Kryràm ne ije o itẽm kêt	 I didn't brought it early
Krokrokre ne kjê'i krã:nne, pa krã:nne	The honey-eater’s hind legs are short, and its front legs are short too
Ne kam krã jaka:re. Its head is white
Ne kam amy jakrita. Its tail is thick and hairy
Kute ijêkre jamypyràk	 It looks like the black monkey
Ne kam kuka po:nhre.		The honey-eater's head is flat.
Ne krokrokre menhbit ku.		He likes honey
Ne kam pĩ kakrê:n 'ã kate, ne kam kuku	He scratches the tree until he makes a hole in it, and then eats the honey
amy tail
ijêkre	black monkey
kakrênh scratch
kakrê	 scratch
kjê'i	 thigh
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti mex During the night, Kokoti was feeling good
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti mex Last night, Kokoti was feeling good
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti ngryk During the night, Kokoti was feeling angry
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti ngryk Last night, Kokoti was feeling angry
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kaprĩre During the night, Kokoti was feeling sad
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kaprĩre Last night, Kokoti was feeling sad
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti rerekre During the night, Kokoti was feeling weak
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti rerekre Last night, Kokoti was feeling good
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti katyk During the night, Kokoti was feeling tired
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti katyk Last night, Kokoti was feeling tired
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kanê During the night, Kokoti was feeling sick
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti kanê Last night, Kokoti was feeling sick
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti tỳx During the night, Kokoti was feeling strong
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti tỳx Last night, Kokoti was feeling strong
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti punu During the night, Kokoti was feeling bad
Akamàtkam ne Kôkôti punu Last night, Kokoti was feeling bad
Mỳj me'õ ne mex?		Who is (that is) feeling well?
Idjuwabô		I'm tractable
Idjukaprĩ	 I'm kind
Idjugàk I'm sobbing
Idjukanga	 I'm lazy
Djã ne ga adjuwabô? Are you tractable?
Djã ne ga adjukaprĩ?		Are you kind?
Djã ne ga adjukanga?		Are you lazy?
Me ukanga.	They're (all) lazy
Me ukanga o nhỹ.		They're (all) lazy
Me ukanga kêtkumrẽx They (all) aren't really lazy
Ijamrex kêt I'm not willingly to eat meat
Ijaxwe kêt	I'm not bad
Ijajne kêt	I'm not satisfied
Djã ne ga ajamrex?	Are you willingly to eat meat?
Djã ne ga ajaxwe?	 Are you bad?
Djã ne ga ajajne?	Are you satisfied?
Axwe		He's bad
Axwere	He's a little mean
Axwekumrẽx	He's really bad
Axwe kêtkumrẽx	He isn't really bad
Mry twỳm ne me axwe kum ành The people really like the meat fat
Me mry djàr o dja, ne kam twỳm kunĩ xêr When someone is roasting the meat, the fat burns
Kà kadjwỳnhbêbit twỳm rã'ã	But the deeper layers of fat remain protected
Me kunĩ axwe kum mry twỳm djành.		The people really like the roasted meat fat
bit just
djàr		roast (in stone oven)
kuga		roast (in stone oven)
kadjwỳnhbê	inside
kunĩ		everyone
kunĩ		everything
me kunĩ everyone
mry meat
mry animal
Ta ne kum prãm	That one is hungry
Ta ne kum kĩnh	That one likes this
Ta ne kum uma	That one is scaried
Ta ne kum kurê	That one hates (somebody)
Ta ne kum abê	That one loves (somebody)
Ta ne kum kaprĩ	That one penalizes himself
Ta ne kum ành	That one loves (somebody)
Djãm gu bamã prãm kêtgot		We (you and me) are really hungry
Djãm gu bamã prãm kĩnh		We (you and me) like this
Djãm gu bamã prãm uma		We (you and me) are scared
Djãm gu bamã prãm kurê		We (you and me) hate (somebody/this)
Djãm gu bamã prãm abê		We (you and me) love (somebody/this/this one)
Djãm gu bamã prãm kaprĩ		We (you and me) feel sorry (for this one)
Djãm gu bamã prãm ành		We (you and me) really like this
Ta ne kum prãm	That one is hungry
Ta ne kum kĩnh	That one like this
Ta ne kum uma	That one is scaried
Ta ne kum kurê	That one hates (someone)
Ta ne kum abê	That one loves (someone)
Ta ne kum kaprĩ	That one penalizes himself (for someone)
Ta ne kum ành	 That one really like this
Mrãmri ne ar kum prãm.	It's true that they (few) are hungry
Mrãmri ne gwaj bamã prãm.	 It's true that we (me and you) and few are hungry
Mrãmri ne me imã prãm	 It's true that we all (except you) are hungry
Mrâmri ne me amã prãm	 It's true that you all are hungry.
Mrãmri ne memã prãm It's true that they all are hungry
Mrãmri ne me bamã prãm. It's true that we (me and you) plus everyone are hungry
Dja ba amã mỳjja jarẽ ga ama.	 I'll explain something for you
Ibãm ne kubê bẽnjadjwỳr.		My father is the chief
Nhym kam ikamy'õ ne me tor djwỳnh.	One of my brothers is the leader of the dances
Nhym inhingêt 'õ ne ngre nhõ djwỳnh.		One of my great uncles is the leader of the chants
Kute me ngrer kunĩ mar mexkumrẽx		He knows all of the chants very well
Tãm ne ba arỳm amã arẽ	I already told this to you
me tor djwỳnh	 leader of the dances in a festival
ngre nhõ djwỳnh	 leader of the chants in a festival
Ibê bẽnjadjwỳr	I'm the chief
Ibê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh	I'm a pilot
Abê ngre nhõ djwỳnh You're the leader of the chants
Kubê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh		He's a pilot
Gu babê mànkào mrãnh djwỳnh We're (you and me) pilots
Ar ibê bẽnjadjwỳr	 We're (few, except you) chiefs.
titik djwỳnh		typist
õmrõ djwỳnh cook
pĩ jakàr djwỳnh lumberjack
pĩ jakàr djwỳnh sawyer
kàmrãnhtyxo mrãnh djwỳnh		driver
me àkà nhipêx djwỳnh		the one who makes headdress
kẽnneja this is a stone
kàneja	this is a canoe
pi'ôkneja	 this is a paper
Djãm kẽnneja?	 Is this a stone?
Kati. Pĩnewa		No, this is a piece of wood
Djãm arỳm ne tẽ?		Has he already gone?
Nhym ne tẽ? Who was?
Arỳm ne tẽ. He already gone
Mỳkam ne tẽ?		Why did he go?
Ajbir ne tẽ.		He went right now
Mỳj me'õ ne tẽ? Who was?
Djã ne tẽ?	Did he go?
Djãm amex?	Are you feeling well?
Nhym ne mex?		Who's feeling well?
Mỳkam ne punu?	Why are you feeling bad?
Mỹj me'õ ne mex?		Who's feeling well?
Mỳj ne ga o dja?		What are you doing?
Nã bãm õmrõ o dja	 I'm cooking
Mỳj õmrõnewa?	 What food is it?
Ngijãdjymẽ djwỳ ngrà.	 It's venice with flour.
É, akmere. Kwarĩk wãnh kupênh kêt	 Look, akmere. Don’t touch it.
Õmrõ ne kangro:.		The food is very hot.
Dja ga anhikra xêr! It'll burn your hand!
Dja ga rũm dja. Go over there!
Pĩponh wa'ã dja ba õmrõ dji.		I will put the food in that shelf nearby you.
Kum aprĩ!	 Be careful!
Dja ajkapĩ. It's going to spill.
djir		to put
kudji	 to put
kupênh	to touch with hands
kupê		to touch with hands
õmrõ		cooked food
xêt to be burned
xêr to be burned
Akato!	Get out!
On akato!	 Get out!
Ama!		Listen!
On ama!	 Listen!
Abĩ!		Kill!
On abĩ!	 Kill!
Nox!		Dive in!
On nox!	 Dive in!
Kre!		Plant it!
On kre!	 Plant it!
Kapõ!		Sweep!
On kapõ!	 Sweep!
Karê!		Brush (it)!
On karê!	 Brush (it)!
Arẽ!		Tell!
On arẽ!	 Tell!
Arẽ!		Say!
On arẽ!	 Say!
Kwarĩk wãnh kupênh kêt! Don't touch
Rũm dja!		Get out of there!
Mũm dja!		Get out of there!
Mã! Go!
Arek o tẽ!	Keep doing it!
Imã wa! Go ahead of me!
Amrẽ tẽ!		Come here!
Oka!		Come here!
Apa!		Come here!
Amrẽ o tẽ!	Bring it! 
Ajte!	 Do it again!
Ajte arẽ!	 Repeat what you said!
Ota!		Look what I have!
Ota!		Look out!
Arek dja!	 Stay!
Adjỹm!	Wait!
Amĩbêx! Run!
Kàjmã dja!	Stand up!
Ẽ!	Hey!
Ori!		Be careful!
Maria, nãr anhõ ropno?	Maria, where's your flashlight?
Inhũrkwãkam ne nõ	 He's at home
Inhũrkwãkam ne nõ	 She's at home
Inhõ ropno kêt	I don't have a flashlight
Akamàt kam dja ga imã anhõ ropno ngã, ba kam kôt tẽ, nẽn?	 This night you give me your flashlight and I will hunt with it, is it OK?
Mrãmri. It's OK.
Ẽ, djãm anhõ ropno kadjwỳnh?	 Look, do you have batteries?
Inhõ ne arỹm rerekre.		Mine are weak.
Nà	Yes
Inhõ ropno kadjwỳnh ne mexkumrẽx		My batteries are strong
Arỳm ne ba itẽmmã	 Then I go
Ajrã.	 Go then
On dja ga mry 'õnh bĩ	 Kill an animal soon
Gê dja ba o bôx ne kam amã kwỳ ngã	When I arrive, I'll give a piece to you
byr to hold something in the hands
kuby to hold something in the hands
inhũrkwã    my own home
'õnh bĩ to kill something
Inhõ kikre neja It's my house
Inhõ ngônh neja It's my pot
Inhõ kax neja	 It's my basket
Inhõ pur neja	 It's my farm
Inhõ kubẽkà neja		It's my cloth
Inhõ kàx neja	 It's my machete
Inhõ karaxu neja	 It's my spoon
Anhõ kikre neja.		It's your house
Anhõ kubẽkà neja.		It's your cloth
Kôkôti nhõ kikre neja.	It's Kôkôti's house
Õ ngônh neja.	 It's his pot.
Nhym nhõ kikre newa?		Whose house is that?
Inhõ kikre neja It's my house
Anhõ kikre neja It's your house
Õ kikre neja		It's his house
Ar inhõ kikre neja	It's our house
Djori anhõ katẽbar? Do you have papaya?
Djori anhõ katẽbar? Is there papaya?
Djori anhõ katẽ?		Do you have pumpkin?
Djori anhõ katẽ?		Is there pumpkin?
Djori anhõ djwỳ ngrà?	 Do you have flour?
Djori anhõ djwỳ ngrà?	 Is there flour?
Inhõ katêbàr kêt.	 I don't have papaya
Inhõ katẽ kêt.	 I don't have pumpkin
Inhõ katẽ djwỳ ngrà.	 I don't have flour
Kati. Kêt.	No, there isn't.
Ikrã neja.	It's my head
Ite neja.	 It's my leg
Ino neja.	 It's my eye
Ipa neja.	 It's my arm
Itik neja.	It's my stomach
Inhikra neja.	 It's my hand
Ijajkwa neja.	 It's my mouth
Iprõ neja.	 It's my wife
Ikamy neja. It's my brother
Inã neja.	 It's my mother
Ikra neja.	 It's my son
Ikra neja.	 It's my daughter
Ibãm neja.	 It's my father
Akrã neja.	It's your head
Ate neja.	 It's your leg
Ano neja.	 It's your eye
Apa neja.	 It's your arm
Atik neja.	It's your stomach
Anhikra neja.	 It's your hand
Ajajkwa neja.	 It's your mouth
Aprõ neja.	 It's your wife
Akamy neja. It's your brother
Anã neja.	 It's your mother
Akra neja.	 It's your son
Akra neja.	 It's your daughter
Abãm neja.	 It's your father
Kôkôti krã neja.		It's Kokoti's head
Kôkôti te neja.	 It's Kokoti's leg
Kôkôti no neja.	 It's Kokoti's eye
Kôkôti pa neja.	 It's Kokoti's arm
Kôkôti tik neja.	It's Kokoti's stomach
Kôkôti nhikra neja. It's Kokoti's hand
Kôkôti jajkwa neja.	 It's Kokoti's mouth
Kôkôti prõ neja.	 It's Kokoti's wife
Kôkôti kamy neja. It's Kokoti's brother
Kôkôti nã neja.	 It's Kokoti's mother
Kôkôti kra neja.	 It's Kokoti's son
Kôkôti krã neja.	It's Kokoti's daughter
Kôkôti bãm neja.	It's Kokoti's father
Krã neja.	It's his head
Te neja.	 It's his leg
No neja.	 It's his eye
Pa neja.	 It's his arm
Tik neja.	It's his stomach
Nhikra neja.	 It's his hand
Jajkwa neja.	 It's his mouth
Prõ neja.	 It's his wife
Kamy neja. It's his brother
Nã neja.	 It's his mother
Kra neja.	 It's his son
Kra neja.	 It's his daughter
Bãm neja.	 It's his father
Djãm akrãkam tokry? Do you have headache?
Djãm atikkam tokry? Do you have stomach ache?
Ãã Ikrãkam tokry.	 Yes, I have headache
Ãã Itikkam tokry.	 Yes, I have stomach ache
Djãm ate punu?	Is your leg bad?
Ãã. Ite punu.	Yes, my leg is bad.
Nhym na anã?		Who is your mother
Inã neja.	 She's my mother
Ta ne ãmja. The one who is standing
Ibãm neja.	It's my father.
Ite neja.	It's my leg.
Inhõ ropre neja.	It's my dog.
Inhõ kikre neja.	It's my house.
Maria, djãm akaprĩre?	 Maria, are you sad?
Kute akaprĩpyràk		You seem sad
Ãã, ikaprĩre		Yes, I'm sad
Ikra kanêkam ne ba ikaprĩre My son is sick and that's why I'm sad
Djãm arỳm ne ga õ pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ?	Have already you looked for his medicine?
Ikrakadjyne ba pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ nhym arỳm kàjbê mex	I have already looked for medicine for him and he got a little better
Mỳj kanê?	 What's his illness?
Kangrokammẽ kakkam kanê.		He has fever and cough.
Akatibê gê dja akra mex jabej.	Let's see if he get better tomorrow.
Ãã, birãm akatibê nhym arỳm mex.		Yes, maybe he'll be fine by tomorrow.
jabej	 let's see
Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because you're leaving.
Inhõ kikre xêt kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because my house burned.
Imjên djàkre kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because my husband is angry
Inhõ karinhô o bikẽnh kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because my tobbaco is destroyed
Inhõ angà ibê biknor kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because my beads are stolen
Inhõ angà ibê biknor kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because my beads are lost
Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because you're leaving
Atẽmdjà kamne ba ikaprĩre.	I'm sad because you're leaving
Mỳkam ne ga muw?		Why are you crying?
Mỳkam ne ga atykdjà?		Why are you tired?
Mỳkam ne ga arek nhỹ?		Why did you stay seated?
Ikra kanêkam ne ba muw	I'm crying because my son is sick
Ikra kanêkam ne ba itykdjà	I'm tired because my son is sick
Ikra kanêkam ne ba arek nhỹ	I stay seated because my son is sick
Mỳjkadjy ne ga bà'ỳr tẽ?		Why did you go to the woods?
Mry Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.	 I went to the woods to hunt
Pidjô Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.	 I went to the woods to fetch fruits
Kruw Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.	 I went to the woods to get arrow materials
Mrôti Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.	 I went to the woods to get genipap
Menh Kadjy ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ.	 I went to the woods to get honey
Mỳjkadjy ne ga pidjỳ'ỳr tẽ? What did you go look for medicine for?
Mỳjkadjy ne ga bà? What did you go to the woods for?
Mỳjkadjy ne ga anhõ kikre? What did you go home for?
Mỳjkadjy ne ga purmã?	What did you go to farm for?
Ikra Kadjy ne ba pidjy'ỳr tẽ I went look for medicine for my son
Mry Kadjy ne ba bà	I went hunting
Idjàpênh Kadjy ne ba inhõ kikre I went home for working
Môp Kadjy ne ba purmã	 I went to get yam
Ije mrj jabej mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of hunting
Ije ngrwaô byr mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of fetching ngrwaô
Ije djudjê kênh mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of straightening an arc
Ije pi mẽnh mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of cutting firewood
Ije mẽnh nhõpô mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of fetching bee honey
Ije bô kabôr mã ne ba bà'ỳr tẽ	 I went with the purpose of opening straw
Amũ akati ja'ã ne ba tẽ.		I went yesterday.
Pi'ôk tyk ny'ã ne ba tẽ.		I went Monday.
Pi'õk ràràr'ã ne ba tẽ.		I went Saturday.
Pi'ôk kamrêk'ã ne ba tẽ.		I went Sunday.
Akati ja'ã ne ba tẽ.		I went today.
Amrẽbê ne ba tẽ.		I went a long time ago.
Akatibê dja ba tẽ.	I'll go tomorrow
Pi'ôk tyk nykam dja ba tẽ.	I'll go Monday
Pi'ôk ràràrkam dja ba tẽ.	I'll go Saturday
Pi'ôk kamrêkkam dja ba tẽ.	I'll go Sunday
Akati'õkam dja ba tẽ.	I'll go one of these days"
ngô tàm flood season
na tỹm	flood season
amex		summer
bày prỳ kamrêk	time when corn turns red
bày ngrà		time when the corn dries
kum ngo rainy season
Kryràm ne me nire purmã mõ nhym me my mry jabej mõ	Early in the morning, the women went to the fields and the men went hunting
Nhym kam kàjmã myt nhỹrkam ne me nire arỳm jàt gan aringro tỳxkam ajte krĩmã bôx	By around 10:00 a.m., the women had already roasted the sweet potatoes, and when the sun was strong, they returned to the village
Nhym myt ibô nhym kam pĩ ngrà'ỳr mõ.		In the afternoon the women went to collect firewood.
Mry bôrkadjy me pĩ ngrà'ỳr mõ	 They went looking for firewoods to roast the meat
Nhym kam amykrykam ne me my bàkurũm bôx.		Then in the afternoon, the men arrive from the woods
Nhym kam me nire parakam arek mry djàro dja.		At dusk, the women were roasting the meat.
Nhym akamàt ngrirekam me kunĩ 'õ kwỳ krẽno nhỹ	Soon after dusk everyone were eating
Nhym akamàt bar arek inhõto nõ	At night everyone slept
akamàt	at night
akamàt ngrire	 after dusk
aringro tỳx when the sun is hot
kàjmã myt nhỹr	around ten o'clock
Mỳj myt nhỳrkam ne ga bôx?	When did you arrive?
Ajbir ne ba bôx.	 I arrived right now
Kryràm ne ba bôx.	 I arrived in early morning
Kàjmã myt nhỹrkam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived around 10:00 a.m.
Myt ibôkam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived in the afternoon
Amykrykam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived in the evening
Parakam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived at dusk
Akamàt ngrirekam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived after dark
Akamàtkam ne ba bôx.	 I arrived at night
Djãm ajbir ne ga bôx?	 Did you arrived now?
akati tẽ		almost at dawn
akati	 the day
akamàt kô ipôkri		late at night
Mỳj newa?	 What's this?
Pi'ôk no'ôk djà neja.	 It's a pen.
Pi'ôk no'ôk djà neja.	 It's a pencil.
Titik djà neja.	 It's a typewriter.
Me kabẽn mar djà neja.	 It's a recorder.
Me kabẽn mar djà neja.	 It's a radio.
Kayr djà neja.	 It's a sewing machine.
Pĩ jakàr djà neja.	 It's a saw.
Me kamjỳr djà neja.	 It's a sewing syringue
Krĩraxkurũm ne me bôx	 They all arrived from city
Kryràm ne ba bàkurũm bôx	 I arrived from the woods in early morning
Nãr, _____. What is _____?
Djã nã gãm mỳjjao akno? Did you lose something?
Bir, ba te inhõ karaxu jabej mrã.	 Well, I looking for my spoon and I don't find it
Birãm ikra ibê o akno.	Maybe my son have thrown away.
Djãm arỳm ne ga pĩponh'ã abejne kikre bu'ã abejne pry'ã abej?	 Have you looked at the table and around the house and on the way?
Ãã, ba arỳm mỳjja kunĩ kamũ.		Yes, I have already examined everything.
Ba arỳm kàkam ne ngônhkam abej ne kum ikator kêt.	 I looked in the basket and in the pot and I don't find it.
Ota.		Look.
Mỳj ne pĩ ngrà'ã mõ?		What is that thing in the firewood?
Tãm ne ja.	That's the one.
Arỳm ne ba ikĩnh.	 Now I'm happy.
Pĩ ngrà parbêbit ne ba omũ. Pĩ ngrà nhiby'ã ne ije omũnh kêt.	 I looked only at the firewood pile but I didn't look on top of firewood
kunĩ		everywhere
Nhãr ngônh? Where's the pot?
Nhãr karaxu?		Where's the spoon?
Nhãr pi'ôk no'ôk?	 Where's the paper?
Nhãr pi'ôk no'ôk?	 Where's the book?
Nhãr parkà? Where's the shoes?
Nhãr katõk? Where's the shotgun?
Wãnh ne ngônh dja	 The pot is there 
Wãnh ne kawa dja.	 The pestle is there
Wãnh ne kà nõ	 The basket is there
Wãnh ne ngônh dja	 The gourd is there
Wãnh ne ngõkon wajêt	 The pot is there
Kà krakri ne dja		It's below the basket
Pĩ parbê ne dja It's at the foot of the tree
Pĩponh nhiby'ã ne dja	 It's on the table
Ngô mỳrri ne dja		It's on the riverbank
Ki jatãri ne dja		It's next to the oven
Kuwy mỳrbè wajêt		It's over the fire.
Kati. Pĩ parbê kàx nõ.	No, the manchet is at the foot of the tree.
Ikra ibê tyk.	 My son died to me.
Ikra ibê tẽ.	 My son is gone from me
Ikra ibê tỹm.	 My son is fallen to me.
Akra abê tyk.	 My son died to him
Akra abê tẽ.	 My son is gone to him
Akra abê tỹm.	 My son is fallen to him
Kôkôti kra kubê tyk.		Kôkôti's son died to him
Kôkôti kra kubê tẽ.		Kôkôti's son is gone to him
Kôkôti kra kubê tỹm.		Kôkôti's son is fallen to him
Mẽ'õ abê tyk		Someone died to him.
Mẽ'õ ibê tyk		Someone died to me.
Mẽ'õ kubê tyk		Someone died to him.
Mẽ'õ Kôkôtibê tyk		Someone died to him.
Mẽ'õ bẽnjadjwỳrbê tyk		Someone died to him.
Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo akĩ. Someone stole my meat from me.
Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo abdju. Someone hid my meat from me.
Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo tẽ. Someone leave my meat from me.
Me'õ ibê inhõ mryo ajkẽ. Someone destroy my meat from me.
Djã ne ga mỳjja o akno?		Did you lose something
Warikokoja ne ba o aknon arỳm kum ikato Yes, I lose the smoking pipe, but I already found it
ã bãm abãm nhidji o akno.	 I forgot your father's name.
Jãnh ne gar mõ? Where are you from?
Onij ngôtyktikurũm ne bar mõ		We're arriving from Ngôtykti river.
Mỳjkadjy ne gar mõ? What did you go for?
Ar ije tep o idjàbirmã ne bar mõ.	 We went for fishing.
Djã ne gãm ar te mõn akubyn mõ? Did you go in vain and come back?
Ari kati!	 No way.
Tep ne kumex!	 We find a lot of fish!
Tep punũtimẽ tetyktimẽ tepikôt ne bar o mõ no bôx	 We brought the catfish, the piranha and the peacock bass.
Djãm arỳm ne me amã tep 'õ ngã? Did they give you a fish?
Kati. Me kuta imã õr kêt.	 No, they don't give me anything.
Je! What a thing!
Ikrakôt dja ba amã tep jano.		I will send one to you with my son.
Mỳjkurũm ne gar mõ? Where are you from?
Pyka jaka bar mõ.	 We arrive from white earth region.
Purmã ne ba tẽ. I'm going to the farm.
Jãm ne ga tẽ?	 Where are you going to?
Jãnh ne ga tẽ?	Where do you come from
Purkurũm ne ba tẽ	 I'm come from the farm
Kôkôti ne nã ro'ã àpênh.		Kôkôti works with her mother
Kôkôti ne kanikwỳnh ro'ã àpênh.		Kôkôti works with her sister
Kôkôti ro'ã ngônhmã tẽ	Kôkôti went to the river with him
Kôkôti ro'ã mànkà'ỳr tẽ		Kôkôti went to the plane with him
Djãm ngrêre?		Are they few?
Kati. Kumex.		No, they're a lot
Krãptĩ	They're a lot
Djãm 'ire?	 Is he lean?
Ĩptĩ		It's fat
Ti	It's big
Rax It's big
Abatành It's huge
Kre rax It's large
Prêk		It's tall.
___, mỳj ne mĩkam kute? How is it the alligattor way
Mĩne punu	 the alligattor is ugly
Nãm kjêti. Nãm inhu jabjê.	He has thick legs and a long mouth.
Nãm amy jabjê.	He has a long tail too.
Nãm a'uri no mjõto ikwã.		During the day, he keeps his eyes closed
Djãm mĩ mexgot! The alligator isn't a good thing, no.
Nà, bar mĩ pymaje prõt ne	 Yes, we run afraid of the alligator
Djãm me kute kur?	 Did we eat him?
Kati. Me kute kur kêt.	No, we don't eat him
Mỳj ne wakõkam kute?		How is it the coati way?
Wakõ ne kĩ kamrêk ne		The coati has red hair
Kwỳ kĩ kamrêk ne kwỳ kĩ krakri kakrãtyk.		Some has red hairs and others has black hairs underneath.
Djãm me kute kur?	 Did we eat him?
Nà. Me kute kur.		Yes, we eat him
kamrêk	red beginning
Mỳj ne pãnh kute?	 How much does it cost?
Mỳj ne djudjê pãnh kute?		How much does the arc cost?
Ta ne pãnh 20.	That thing costs 20.
Katõk'y pãnh 20.		The candies costs 20
Mỳj ne nhidji kute? What is his name?
Mỳj ne nhidji kute? What is that one's name?
Nhidjibê ne João		His name is João
Mỳj ne ga tawa on?	How do you do that thing?
Mỳj ne ga adjàpênh on?	How do you do your work?
Ba amã môp kaba.		I took some cara for you.
Ba amĩm môp kaba.		I took some cara for me.
Ba amim kuby.	 I got it for me.
Ba amim kay.	 I sewed it for me.
Me aben tak They fought
Me abenmã kabẽn They talked
Me abenmã 'ã karõ	They planned
Me abenkam ngryk They got angry
Me kwatỳnh me'ỳr ban bôx ne kam me kra'ã memã kabẽn ne	 The grandmas go to them and they talk about their children.
Me kwatỳnh me'ỳr ban bôx ne kam me kra'ã memã kabẽn ne	 The aunts go to them and they talk about their children.
Nhym me kam me êje tor krĩ. Then they dance to honor the children.
Nã bãm kum, So I ask him,
Mỳj'ã ne me amĩjaprã? Djãm kaprãn'ã? ane. Nhym kam, "What meat did they end the party with? Was it with tortoise?" Then,
Kati. Nãm me ate amrẽ me'õ'ã tep'ỳr tẽ. "No, they went looking for fish to use as food for the party climax"
Ba kam kum, I told him
Mỳj me'õ kra djêje ne me amĩjaprã? ane. Nhym kam		"Whose was the child honored in the party?"
Be, ar àtẽk djêje ne me amĩjaprã.	 "Well, it was their àtẽk that was honored in the party."
amĩjaprã		make the highlight of a party
Mỳj me'õ'ã ne me keket? Who are they laughing at?
Mỳj me'õ'ã ne me kabẽn? Who are they talking about?
Kra'ã ne me keket	 They're laughing at the child
Kra'ã ne me kabẽn	 They're talking about the child
Mỳj'ã ne me amĩjaprã?	 What did they end the party with
Kaprãn'ã ne me amĩjaprã.		They ended it with the tortoise.
Angrô ne me amĩjaprã.		They ended it with the jawbone.
Tep ne me amĩjaprã.		They ended it with the jawbone.
Mry ne me amĩjaprã.		They ended it with the meat.
Kôkôti ne 'ã kabẽn. Kôkôti told about him.
Kôkôti ne ijã kabẽn.		Kôkôti told about me.
Kôkôti ne ajã kabẽn.		Kôkôti told about you.
Kôkôti ne me'ã kabẽn.		Kôkôti told about them.
Kôkôti ne 'ã ngryk.	Kôkôti got angry
Kôkôti ne 'ã karõ.	Kôkôti planned it.
Kôkôti ne 'ã ku'uw.	Kôkôti asked for it.
Kôkôti ne 'ã kuta.	Kôkôti open it.
Kôkôti ne 'ã kudja.	Kôkôti threw it for him.
Mỳj me'õ ne ga o akamy? Who do you call brother?
Mỳj me'õ ne ba o nã? Who do I call mother?
Mỳj me'õ ne Kôkôti o bãm? Who does Kôkôti call father?
Mỳj me'õ ne ga o akamy? Who do you call brother?
Kôkôti ne ba ije o ikamy.	 I call Kôkôti my brother
Kôkôti ne ba ije o inã.	 I call Kôkôti my mother
Kôkôti ne ba ije o ibãm.	 I call Kôkôti my father
Mỳj ne ga Kôkôti o? How do you call Kôkôti?
Mỳj ne ba Kôkôti o? How do I call Kôkôti?
Ije o ibãm. I call him my father
Aje o abãm. You call him my father
Kute o bãm. He calls him my father
Nhym nã tẽ? Who was it?
Ba ne ba tẽ I went myself
Ba ne ba bôx		I arrived myself
Ba ne ba ikabẽn		I told it myself
Ba ne ba kubĩ		I killed him myself
Ba ne ba idjàpênh		I worked myself
Ba ne ba karê		I weeded it myself
Ba ajbit ne ba tẽ.	Only I went
Ba ajbit ne ba bôx.	Only I arrived
Ba ajbit ne ba ikabẽn.	Only I spoke
Ba ajbit ne ba kubĩ.	Only I killed him
Ba ajbit ne ba idjàpênh.	Only I worked
Ba ajbit ne ba karê.	Only I weeded
Ba ajbit ne ba bôx.	Only I arrived
Bar tẽ, ga kam bôx. We went and you arrived.
Ga tẽ, bar kam bôx. You went and we arrived.
Ba me tẽ, gar kam bôx.	We all went and you all arrived.
Ga me tẽ, ba me kam bôx.		You all went and we all arrived.
Gar tẽ, ba me kam bôx.	You went and we all arrived.
Bar tẽ nhym kam bôx.		We went than he arrived
Ba me tẽ nhym kam bẽnjadjwỳr bôx.		We all went than the boss arrived
Gar tẽ nhym kam ar bôx.		You went than they arrived
Gar tẽ nhym kam mànkà bôx.		You went than the airplane arrived
Nhym kam me'õja, mak kute kanhwỳrja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was stung by the scorpion — lay down groaning
Nhym kam me'õja, ropre kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the dog — lay down groaning
Nhym kam me'õja, ropkrori kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the ounce — lay down groaning
Nhym kam me'õja, mĩ kute nhãnhja, àmra o nõ. Then that one — the one who was bitten by the alligator — lay down groaning
Nhym me'õ abatànhja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the big one - arrived soon after us.
Nhym me'õ prêkja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the tall one - arrived soon after us.
Nhym me'õ katykja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the tired one - arrived soon after us.
Nhym me'õ partãtãkja me totokbê tẽn bôx. Then that one - the one whose feet was hurting - arrived soon after us.
Tô be	 then
Tô be	 Are you seeing it?
be	 then
be	 Are you seeing it?	
Tuka		then
Tuka		Are you seeing it?
tukwa	 then
tukwa	 Are you seeing it?
Je tô mỳj nã		What's it!
Djô mỳj nã	What's it!
Wajre	 expression
Djuk wajre	expression
Bep but...
Kwep		but...
Kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.		I went to the plateau.
Inhõ kritteo tẽ.		I took my dogs.
Nhym kam pàtjao mõn o dja.	The the dogs were behind an anteater and cornered him.
Ba kam kubĩ.		Then I killed him.
Ne kam akubyn kutuno mõno bôx.	After I come back carrying him in my back and arrived.
Nhym kam me imã,		Then the other asked me
Jãm ne ga tẽ? ane.	Ba kam kum,	Where did you go? And I answered him.
Kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.		I went to the plateau
Onijkam mry kumex, ane. There is a lot of hunting there
Ã memã ane. So I told them
kritte	pet
Ba katõko pàt bĩ.	 I killed the anteater with the shotgun
Ba kôo pàt bĩ.	 I killed the anteater with the staff
Ba kẽno pàt bĩ.	 I killed the anteater with the stone
Ba kruwo pàt bĩ.	 I killed the anteater with the arrow
Ba pĩo pàt bĩ.	 I killed the anteater with a piece of wood
Onij kapôt kukritmã ne ba tẽ.	 I went to the plateau far away.
Katõk mexjao ne ba pàtja kubĩ.	I killed the anteater with that good shotgun.
Kôkôti kute mry pumũnh mex ne.	Kôkôti knows a lot about the animals.
Nãm bàkam ar mrã ne tebê mry 'õnh bĩ.	 When he goes hunting, he kill an animal soon.
Djãm mrybit ne Kôkôti kute pumũnh?	Does he only know things about the animals?
Ari kati!	 No way!
Nãm kukônh nhipêx pumũ. He knows how to weave the masks of the monkeys.
Nãm kute kupip kayr pumũnh	He knows how to weave sleeping mats.
Nãm kute djudjê nhipêx pumũnh.	He knows how to do bows
Djãm Kôkôti kute mỳjja mar ngrigot! Kôkôti really knows a lot!
Djãm no punũgot!		He's very smart.
no punũ to be foolish
Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh. Kôkôti knows how to read.
Kôkôti kute pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh. Kôkôti knows how to write.
Kôkôti kute pry pumũnh. Kôkôti knows how the path.
Ba ije pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.	I know how to read.
Ba ije pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.	I know how to write.
Ga aje pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.	You know how to read.
Ga aje pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh.	You know how to write.
Djãm Kôkôti kute kabẽn? Does Kôkôti know the speeches?
Djãm Kôkôti kute me ngrer mar? Does Kôkôti know the chants?
Djãm Kôkôti kute me kane? Does Kôkôti know how to treat illnesses?
Djãm ga aje me ngrer mar?	 Do you know tha chants.
Arỳm ne djwỳ kangro mõ. The food comes to be hot.
Arỳm ne bày ngrâ mõ.		The corn comes to be dry.
Arỳm ne bày kamrêk mõ.	The corn comes to be red.
Arỳm ne bày prêk mõ.		The food comes to be tall.
Arỳm ne kra nhĩpti mõ.	The kid comes to be fat.
Arỳm ne kra abatành mõ. The kid comes to be big.
Arỳm ne aringro tỳx mô. It becomes a hot day.
Arỳm ne akati.	 It becomes the day.
Arỳm ne akamàt.	 It becomes the night.
Gwaj on!		Let's go!
Ba inhõ kwỳ krẽn pamã.	Wait until I finish eating, ok!
Ba ngônh pyror põnh pamã.		Wait until I finish washing the dishes, ok!
Ba pi'ôk no'ôk pumũnh pamã.		Wait until I finish reading it, ok!
Ba arek dja.		I stand up.
Ba arek nhỹ.		I sit down.
Ba arek nõ.		I lie down.
Ba arek iku'ê.		I usually stand up.
Ba arek krĩ.		I usually sit down.
Ba arek ikwã.		I usually lie down.
Arỳm ne tẽ.		 He's already gone
Arỳm ne ga tẽ.	You've already gone
Arỳm ne gu tẽ. You and me have already gone
Arỳm ne ba tẽ. I've already gone
Arỳm ne me mõ.	They've already gone
Arỳm ne gar mõ.	You've already gone
Arỳm ne ga me mõ.	You all have already gone
Arỳm ne ba me mõ.	We all have already gone
Arỳm ne gu me mõ.	You, me and everyone have already gone
Arỳm ne kikrekam wadjà. He's already entered in the house.
Arỳmne me kikrekam wangij.	They've already entered in the house.
bê	to the detriment of
neja		that is
mexkumrẽx	 very good
kêt truly
Mỳj ne kam kute?		How is it the thing?
Mỳj ne ga ta on?		How do you do such a thing?
Mỳj'ã?	Whose?
Mỳj'ã?	With whom?
Mỳ? What do you want?
Anhõ ka o nõ.	 Lie on your back.
Atu mỳrbê tỹm ne nõ.		Lie on your stomach.
Ano ngõr.	 Close the eyes.
Kum aprĩ gê ngo kêt.		Don't get it wet
O djuwamex. Kwarĩk wãnh ngo kêt gê kakrãtyk kêt.		Don't get it dirty.
Akati dja ga akubyn tẽ. Come back tomorrow.
Inhĩarop.	 I have a cold.
Nã bãm ikuw.		I'm with dysentery.
Kangã ne inhã.	A snake stung me
djwỳ ngrà	 cassava flour
gu badjàpênho nhỹ	 Let's start our work.